ALL RIGHT,
WELCOME TO THE RECORDING IN
PROGRESS.
WELCOME WEDNESDAY, JANUARY
17TH, 2020 FOR ELECTRONIC
MEETING THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT IT SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING PUBLIC
COMMENT WILL BE VIA TELEPHONE
OR ONLY TO SPEAK DURING ANY THE
PUBLIC COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES
PLEASE CALL TWO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND THEN MEETING ID
NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR JOIN VIA INFORMATION
AVAILABLE IN THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CHANNEL 16.
LET'S SEE.
I WILL OK LET'S DO ROLL CALL
NOW IF THE GOOD CHRISTOPHER
PLEASE RECEIVE REGRET'S FROM
COMMISSIONER BOLDEN ATTENTION
AND COLLEAGUES WHO WILL NOT BE
ABLE TO ATTEND THIS HERE AND
FROM YOUR TIMING WHEN YOUR NAME
IS CALLED MISSION COMMISSIONER
BRIGS COMMISSIONER BROGAN HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
AUTOMATIC HEAR FROM ANOTHER
COMMISSIONER HOOK HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR COMMISSIONER KEELER,
INFORMATION COMMISSIONER CLAMAN
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR,
COMMISSIONER LEE HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR, UTIAN THE CARPENTER HERE
FROM SUPERIOR TOWNSHIP
COMMISSIONER RAMASWAMY, YOU'RE
FROM ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER HAS
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR YOU TO MAKE
SURE YOU'RE FROM TORONTO,
AREN'T YOU?
>> AND THAT WE THANK YOU.
THERE'S TWO ITEMS ON THE AGENDA
TODAY APPROVAL OF THE AGENDA
AND APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA?
YES,
NO GET ON MEET YOUR SO
PLEASE BE SORRY.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO MAKE A
COMMENT ABOUT THE MINUTES
BEFORE WE APPROVE THEM.
SURE.
WE'VE GOT AN EXTRA PERSON WHO I
DON'T THINK WAS AT THE MEETING.
I DON'T THINK RAFINA WAS AT THE
MEETING LAST WEEK BUT SHE'S
SHOWN IS PRESENT IN THE VERY
LAST MONTH.
OK, YEAH SO KRISTEN CHRIS OR
REYNOLD I GUESS IF YOU COULD
GET THAT ANY OTHER THANKS FOR
NOTICING THAT PETE.
>> YES, ANY OTHER MODIFICATIONS
TO THE AGENDA OR MINUTES.
ALL RIGHT.
MOTION TO APPROVE MADE BY ONE
WAS SECONDED BY MEGHAN ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION
PLEASE SAY YES.
>> RAISE YOUR HAND ALL THOSE
OPPOSED PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE
AND I BELIEVE IT IS APPROVED BY
PUBLIC AND THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR PERSONS TO
SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES
PLEASE TWO ZERO SIX THREE THREE
SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO THREE
ANOTHER MEETING I'D NUMBER NINE
THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE
TWO NINERO SEVEN OR CONNECT
THE RESUME AS DESCRIBED IN THE
AGENDA CITY STAFF WILL SELECT
CALLERS THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR
HAND ONE BY ONE USING THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE
NUMBER OR THE PERSON ZUBEIDA IN
ORDER TO ELECTRONICALLY RAISE
YOUR HAND TO INDICATE YOUR
DESIRE TO SPEAK PLEASE PRESS
STAR NINE ON YOUR PHONE OR
SELECT THE RAISE HAND BUTTON
INTO AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT
THAT THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU
TO SPEAK WHEN SPEAKING.
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
ANY TELEVISION OR BACKGROUND
SOUND SO THAT WE CAN HEAR YOU
CLEARLY.
RAYMOND, DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO HAVE RAISED
THEIR HAND EVEN JUST A MOMENT
TO SEE IF ANYBODY RAISES?
WE DO HAVE A COUPLE OF MEMBERS
FROM THE PUBLIC ATTENDING BUT I
DON'T SEE ANY HANDS RAISED AT
THE MOMENT.
OK, NONE
.
THANK YOU TO EVERYONE WHO DID
SEND EMAILS.
THERE ARE SIX EMAILS IN OUR
PACKET SO PLEASE TAKE A LOOK AT
THOSE IF YOU HAVEN'T ALREADY.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IN THE BUSINESS
SECTION, IT'S TIME TO SELECT TO
VOTE FOR A CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR
OF THE COMMISSION.
SO RAYMOND, IF YOU COULD WALK
US THROUGH THAT PROCESS PLEASE.
>> YEAH, THANK YOU.
SO PURSUANT TO THE BYLAWS AND
NEW CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR MUST
BE SEATED BY MARCH 1ST AND THE
ELECTION FOR THOSE POSITIONS
MUST OCCUR AT LEAST ONE MONTH
BEFORE THE CURRENT OFFICERS
TERM EXPIRES AND THIS IS ALL
PER THE BYLAWS.
SO OBVIOUSLY FEBRUARY 1ST THIS
IS OUR LAST MEETING BEFORE
FEBRUARY 1ST.
SO THAT'S WHY WE HAVE TO
CONDUCT THE ELECTIONS BOARD
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR TONIGHT.
IF YOU HAD A CHANCE TO LOOK AT
THE HOMEWORK WE DID PASTE IN
THE RELEVANT INFORMATION ABOUT
THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR AND I'LL
JUST QUICKLY READ OFF THE MOST
PERTINENT PART WHICH IS THE
CHAIR SHALL PRESIDE AT ALL
MEETINGS AND SHALL DECIDE
POINTS OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE
SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS
OF THE BYLAWS.
THE CHAIR SHALL HAVE THE
PRIVILEGE OF DISCUSSING AND
VOTING ON ALL MATTERS BEFORE
THE COMMISSION.
THE VICE CHAIR SHALL ASSUME THE
DUTIES OF THE CHAIR IN THE
CHAIR'S ABSENCE.
ONE OTHER THING THAT ANYBODY
WHO MAY BE INTERESTED IN THE
POSITION SHOULD KNOW I MEET
WITH THE CHAIR AND THE VICE
CHAIR TWO FRIDAYS TYPICALLY
BEFORE THE MEETING.
SO THEN THAT WAY WE CAN SET THE
AGENDA.
WE DO THAT KIND OF IN UNISON
BEFORE WE START PUTTING
TOGETHER ALL MATERIALS SO THERE
IS A KIND OF UNWRITTEN
OBLIGATION AS WELL IN TERMS
OF WHAT WE'VE HISTORICALLY DONE
AND SO FOR THIS POINT NOW I
TURN IT BACK OVER TO YOU AND
SEE IF ANY NOMINATIONS FOR
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR AND THEN
DEPENDING UPON HOW THE
NOMINATIONS GO, THE COMMISSION
CAN DECIDE TO TAKE IT ALL IN
ONE MOTION FOR CHAIR AND VICE
CHAIR, SEPARATE THAT OUT SO WE
CAN KIND OF HANDLE IT HOW YOU'D
LIKE TO HANDLE IT.
>> THANK YOU, RAYMOND.
I WOULD LIKE TO NOMINATE MEGHAN
FOR VICE CHAIR.
YES, MOLLY, I WOULD LIKE TO
NOMINATE JACK BUT YOU BEAT ME
TO IT.
ANY OTHER NOMINATIONS?
ALL RIGHT.
SAYING NONE.
IS THERE A MOTION TO ELECT
MYSELF HOW TO MACíAS CHAIR AND
THEY CAN ROVEN AS VICE CHAIR
OF THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION
THEIR MOTION ONE
OF SECONDED BY MOLLY ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION TO
MYSELF AS CHAIR AND MEGAN AS
VICE CHAIR PLEASE SAY YES OR
RAISE YOUR HAND YES ALTHOUGH
ZIPPOS PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE
YOUR HAND ALL RIGHT.
>> I THINK THAT'S THAT IS IT.
>> REMEMBER THEY HAVE ANOTHER
YEAR OF US.
I THINK WE'RE GOOD TO GO.
>> THANK YOU ALL.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
I LOOK FORWARD TO ANOTHER
ANOTHER YEAR AND AND THANKS TO
MEGAN FOR VOLUNTEERING TO BE
VICE CHAIR AGAIN.
THANK YOU.
OK, GREAT.
WELL LET'S GET INTO THE ANNUAL
REPORT THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ANNUAL REPORT YOU'LL SEEN IN
THE PACKET IS THE FINAL DRAFT
OF THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE TRANSPORT
COMMISSION.
WE REVIEWED THE DRAFT LAST
MONTH AND STAFF WILL BE ASKING
FOR A VOTE IN THIS MEETING SO
CHRISTOPHER COULD GIVE A BRIEF
OVERVIEW OF THE DOCUMENT AND
WHAT'S CHANGED SINCE LAST MONTH
.
LET ME JUST GO AHEAD AND
RESPOND.
CANNOT SEE THE ANNUAL REPORT
AT
NATIONAL NO.
YEAH, WE CAN SEE IT.
OH PERFECT.
PERFECT.
>> OK, SO JUST THE START OF THE
ONLY THINGS THAT REALLY CHANGE
WAS I ADDED THE PICTURE
STATEMENT HERE THE STATEMENT
FROM THE CHAIR RIGHT HERE IS
SINCE MY INTEREST IS A LITTLE
LAGGING I APOLOGIZE FOR THAT.
OK, SO THE STATEMENT FROM THE
CHAIR WAS ADDED READ PROVIDED A
LANGUAGE AND IT'S RIGHT HERE
AND THERE.
ON THE OTHER ADDITION IS THE
INCLUSION OF THE DEC FILES AND
THE MOTIONS THAT MADE DURING
THE DECEMBER MEETING RIGHT HERE
IN BALLU.
SO THAT DECEMBER WORKPLAN AND
THE CORRESPONDING FILE IDEAS
FOR OUR DECEMBER NOW CARE RIGHT
HERE AND THOSE ARE PRETTY MUCH
THE ONLY THINGS THAT WERE ADDED
TO THE ANNUAL REPORT THE WE
HAVE A QUICK CONVERSATION
REGARDING THE THE PICTURE IT IS
YOU HAD WANTED TO TAKE A
ANOTHER PICTURE GIVEN THAT THE
DECEMBER ATTENDANCE WAS
INEVITABLE SHORT.
BUT I'LL LEAVE THAT UP TO YOU
GUYS OR WE CAN KEEP THE PICTURE
AS IS.
BUT YEAH, THOSE ARE PRETTY MUCH
THE ONLY TWO UPDATES TO THE
ANNUAL REPORT AND OUR OPEN FOR
ANY QUESTIONS THAT YOU CAN ASK
ME HAS LET'S SEE IT LOOKS LIKE
WE HAD TWELVE PEOPLE.
I'M NOT SURE WOULD IT BE BETTER
TO DO ANOTHER PICTURE NOW IT
SEEMS LIKE WE'VE ADDED WHAT
MAYBE ONE OR TWO PEOPLE HERE
AND THEN LOST ONE OR TWO
PEOPLE?
SO WHAT DO YOU WHAT DO YOU
THINK?
I MEAN SHOULD WE JUST DO
ANOTHER ONE JUST FOR THE SAKE
OF IT AND YOU GUYS CAN CHOOSE
OR I DON'T KNOW YOU KNOW ONE
THING I WAS THINKING, CHRIS, IF
WE GET CREATIVE WHAT WE COULD
DO IS PASTE THE FOLKS WHO
AREN'T HERE.
>> WE COULD TAKE THEIR TILES,
THEIR LITTLE HOLLYWOOD SQUARES
OR BRADY BUNCH PICTURES AND
COME INTO THE MATRIX SINCE WE
DO HAVE SOME FOLKS TONIGHT THAT
WEREN'T ABLE TO JOIN AND VICE
VERSA, THERE'S LIKE NICK AND
JULIE AREN'T ABLE TO MAKE IT
TONIGHT SO I'D HATE TO LOSE
THEM AS WELL.
SO I'D BE UP FOR ANOTHER
PICTURE AND THEN CHRIS CAN HAVE
FULL DISCRETION IN TERMS
OF WHICH PICTURE HE THINKS IS
BETTER FOR EACH OF YOU.
>> HAVE YOU WANT THAT'S ALL
RIGHT.
YEAH.
SO IF YOU WANT TO STOP THE
SCREEN SHARE AND DO WHATEVER
YOU NEED TO DO CHRIS CHRISTIE
OR WHATEVER
, OK, WE HAVE
EVERYONE POSE ON THREE ONE,
TWO, THREE
OK.
AND IT LOOKS LIKE I WAS ABLE TO
INTO THE PICTURE SO WE ARE GOOD
TO GO.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE ANNUAL REPORT PEOPLE
ADDED TO CHANCE TO LOOK THROUGH
IT?
ANY OTHER ANY COMMENTS I HOPE
KNOW PROUD OF ALL THAT'S IN
THERE?
IT WAS IT WAS A GREAT YEAR.
YOU THE THEME OF MY STATEMENT
WAS THAT IT WAS KIND OF AN
IMPLEMENTATION OR AN EXECUTION.
YOUR YOU KNOW, THE PLANNING
STAGES ARE A LOT OF FUN AND
THEY'RE GREAT BUT I'M HAPPY TO
BE FOCUSING A LITTLE BIT MORE
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ALL
OF OUR GREAT PLANS AND I THINK
A TWENTY TWENTY THREE WAS
REPRESENTATIVE THE
REPRESENTATIVE OF THAT.
BEFORE WE GO INTO THE NEXT
SECTION THOUGH, I WOULD LIKE TO
WELCOME BACK COUNCIL MEMBER
ERIKA BRIGG'S TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
IT'S BEEN A YEAR BUT SHE'S BACK
AND I THINK ALSO ESPECIALLY
COUNCIL MEMBER ADAMAH ACTION
FOR HER TIME ON THE COMMISSION
LAST YEAR YOU MAY HAVE SEEN A
NOTE FROM DARMA IN THE PUBLIC
COMMENT EMAILS BUT ERIKA, IT'S
GREAT TO HAVE YOU BACK.
YOU GUYS ARE KIND OF LOOKING
BACK AND FORTH AND IT'S GOOD TO
TRADE YOU IN TERMS OF BACK AND
FORTH.
SO WELCOME.
WE BOTH LOVE IT SO WE JUST HAVE
TO TAKE TURNS.
ALL RIGHT.
AND PARDON ME IF I IF I MAY I
THINK WE DO SEE ACTION ON THE
IMPORTANT UM SO IS THERE A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE TWENTY
TWENTY THREE ANNUAL REPORT AND
FORWARD IT TO CITY COUNCIL?
>> I I WOULD MOVE TO APPROVE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
MOTION BY LARRY AND SECONDED BY
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE SAY
YES SIR.
>> RAISE YOUR HAND.
>> YES ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE
SAY NO RAISE YOUR HAND MOTION
PASSES CITY COUNCIL WILL GET
THIS REPORT.
NEXT UP IS THE FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE POLICY
AGENDA.
EVERY YEAR WE PASS ALONG POLICY
AND LEGISLATIVE SUGGESTIONS
TO
CITY COUNCIL'S POLICY AGENDA
COMMITTEE CONCERNING LOCAL AND
STATE ISSUES.
WE INTRODUCE THIS ITEM LAST
MONTH AND WE'D LIKE TO CONTINUE
THE DISCUSSION WITH A POSSIBLE
VOTE ON THE DOCUMENT TONIGHT IF
WE'RE COMFORTABLE WITH HOW IT
TURNS OUT WILL KIND OF EDITING
IT IN REAL TIME.
SO RAYMOND, IF YOU CAN DISPLAY
WHERE WE'RE AT AND YOU KNOW,
RECORD WHAT THE WHAT WE SUGGEST
IN THE DISCUSSION, OK, SO SO
YOU'VE GOT THIS IS THE CURRENT
STATE OF THE DOCUMENT, RIGHT?
>> YES.
SO YEAH.
THANK YOU FOR THAT
INTRODUCTION.
SO YEAH, AS WE MENTIONED LAST
MONTH AND JUST TO REITERATE
TYPICALLY WHAT WE'VE DONE IN
THE PAST IS KIND OF RECYCLE THE
PREVIOUS POLICY AGENDA
RECOMMENDATIONS AND THEN ADD TO
IT OR MAKE CHANGES TO IT BASED
ON THE PREFERENCE OF THE
COMMISSION.
SO I'VE GONE THROUGH AND JUST
DONE SOME MINOR CHANGES BASED
ON SOME OF THE YOU KNOW, JUST
YEARS AND THEN QUESTION ANOTHER
ONE THAT CAN BE REMOVED.
I DID GET SOME RECOMMENDATIONS
FROM THE RIDE THE ACHMAT AND
I'VE GONE THROUGH AND PASTED
SOME OF THOSE IN MATT
ADMITTEDLY I MAY HAVE NOT
GOTTEN THROUGH ALL OF THEM SO I
MIGHT NEED YOU TO SEE THOSE TO
MAKE SURE THAT I PULL THOSE
OVER APPROPRIATELY SO WE CAN DO
THIS A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
WAYS.
WE DO HAVE A FAIR AMOUNT
OF TIME ALLOCATED FOR THIS
DISCUSSION.
IF YOU WANT I CAN JUST KIND
OF READ THROUGH THEM AND PAUSE
AND JUST SEE IF YOU'RE RIGHT OR
IF EVERYONE'S HAD A CHANCE TO
DO THAT.
I DON'T WANT TO NECESSARILY
WASTE YOUR TIME BY READING
WORDS ON A SCREEN SO REALLY I
NEED YOU TO DO THAT.
I'M HAPPY TO DO IT THEN LIKE AS
BRET SAID, I THINK THE IDEA IS
I'LL DO MY BEST TO TRY TO MAKE
EDITS ON THE FLY SO I HAVE
TRACK CHANGES ON YOU CAN SEE
ANY ADDITIONS OR DELETIONS AND
THEN IF EVERYONE'S COMFORTABLE
WITH THE WAY THINGS LOOK AFTER
THE END OF THIS DISCUSSION, IF
YOU FEEL COMFORTABLE VOTING ON
IT TONIGHT SO THAT IT CAN BE
FORWARDED ON TO COUNCIL, THAT'S
AN OPPORTUNITY.
BUT I THINK THERE HAVE BEEN
MEETINGS IN THE PAST WHERE WE
HAVEN'T FINALIZED THE DOCUMENT
TILL FEBRUARY SO WE DON'T GET
THROUGH IT ALL TONIGHT.
IT'S NOT THE END OF THE WORLD
BUT THIS IS THE LAST MAJOR
SUBSTANTIVE ITEM ON THE AGENDA
.
SO I THINK THERE'S A FAIR
AMOUNT OF TIME FOR US TO
THROUGH THIS ISSUE.
SO ANY PREFERENCES ON HOW I DO
IT?
YOU WANT ME TO KIND OF JUST
QUICKLY READ SOME THINGS AND
THEN JUST PAUSE OR JUST KIND
OF FOLKS HAVE COMMENTS ON YOU
KNOW, I THINK WE CAN AT LEAST
WE DON'T NEED TO READ THEM BUT
LET'S MAYBE GO POINT BY POINT A
LITTLE BIT HERE.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE FIRST ONE
OF THE BIG IT'S THE SPEED LIMIT
REDUCTION ADVOCATING FOR LOWER
STATE WIDE MINIMUM SPEED LIMIT
.
THIS WOULD BE A STATE ACTION AS
WELL AS A HOSPITAL CONCERNING
SPEEDING IN SCHOOL ZONES AND
THEN THE THIRD BULLET IS
CHANGING MOVING AWAY FROM THE
FIFTH PERCENTILE RULE FOR
SETTING SPEED LIMITS.
SO I THINK THESE ARE EVERGREEN
REQUESTS.
I DON'T THINK THESE HAVE
CHANGED IN A NUMBER OF YEARS.
THERE MAY BE SOME MOTION ON
THESE AT THE STATE LEVEL.
I'M NOT SURE I'VE HEARD SOME
ENCOURAGING THINGS BUT IT'S IN
MY OPINION IT'S WISE TO KEEP
THEM.
CERTAINLY THE CHANGES HAVEN'T
HAPPENED YET SO IS THERE ANY
COMMENTS ABOUT PEOPLE FROM
PEOPLE THAT WOULD LIKE TO
CHANGE THE WORDING OR ADD ANY
BULLETS TO THIS EFFORT TO
REDUCE SPEEDS, SPEED LIMITS?
>> RIGHT.
IF NOT, WE'LL MOVE ON TO THE
NEXT ONE, WHICH IS TO ADVOCATE
THAT FOR THE DOT TO MAKE IT
EASIER TO IMPLEMENT CROSSWALK
SIDEWALKS, BIKE LANES, SPEED
REDUCTION BUS LANES, ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS ON ON STATE
ROADS.
SO I SEE THAT YOU ADDED BUS
LANES TO THE LIST OF RIDES OR
TRANSIT IMPROVEMENT ON STATE
ROAD.
SO THE GIST OF THIS IS THAT
MAKE IT EASIER FOR US TO
ADVOCATE FOR THE POOR CHANGES
TO STATE STATE ROADS, IS THAT
RIGHT?
>> CORRECT.
SINCE THIS IS STATE PACING AND
JUST AS A REMINDER OF THE FIRST
HALF OF THE DOCUMENT IS
DIRECTED TOWARDS THE STATE, THE
SECOND HALF OF THE DOCUMENT IS
DIRECTED TO THE LOCAL OFFICIALS
.
SO PRETTY MUCH EVERYTHING WE
TALK ABOUT FOR THIS FIRST PART
IS FOR M DOT OR THE STATE
LEGISLATURE TO POSSIBLY
CONSIDER OK SO I LIKE BUSTLINE
THAT IT GETS AN OVERSIGHT THAT
WE HAD.
SO I APPRECIATE ADDING THAT ARE
THERE ANY OTHER ADDITIONS OR
COMMENTS THAT PEOPLE WANT OR
MAYBE MORE SPECIFIC SPECIFICITY
ON THIS NOTICE THE TIME
.
>> YEAH ERICA AND I APOLOGIZE
THEY DIDN'T READ THIS
COMPLETELY THOROUGHLY BUT I
DON'T WANT ADDITIONS THAT MIGHT
BE USEFUL IS TO ADVOCATE FOR
THE STATE AND POTENTIALLY THIS
ACTUALLY MIGHT BE A BETTER
RECOMMENDATION AS WELL AROUND
CROSSING'S ON HIGH SPEED RAIL.
I KNOW THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
WE'RE DEALING WITH AT IN TERMS
OF AT GRADE CROSSINGS ON HIGH
SPEED RAIL SEEMS TO BE A LITTLE
BIT OF A CHALLENGE IS THAT
SORRY.
THANK YOU ALL ARE YEAH
.
ALL RIGHT.
OK SO FOR IF WE'RE HAPPY THE
SECOND BULLET POINT CAN MOVE ON
THEN AS YOU MENTIONED.
>> SORRY I'M SORRY I'M GOING
NOW I'M READING IT SO AND THAT
ISN'T ACTUALLY ALLOWED TO DO
THIS.
>> I THINK IT'S A STATE
LEGISLATIVE IT'S ACTUALLY
SOMETHING IN THE IN THE THEY
DON'T HAVE THE DISCRETION TO DO
THIS SO IT MIGHT USEFUL TO ADD
IF I'M CORRECT THIS I'M HAPPY
TO BE CORRECTED IF I'M WRONG.
>> MR. HESS AND BELIEVE THAT'S
A STATE LEGISLATIVE ISSUE
SORRY.
>> WHICH BULLET POINT ARE WE
TALKING ABOUT?
THE ADVOCATE FOR ME RAIL
OPERATOR OPERATORS TO PROVIDE
SAFE NOMURA'S CROSSINGS ACROSS
THE ACTIVE RAIL LINES.
THE ISSUE BEING THAT WE HAVE A
HIGH SPEED RAIL LINE AND AND
THAT ISN'T I DON'T THINK
PERMITTED TO PROVIDE AT GRADE
CROSSINGS OR HIGH SPEED RAIL
AND SO WE COULD KIND
OF LEGISLATIVE THERE'S A
VEHICLE POTENTIALLY TO HAVE
THAT DISCRETION.
>> I KNOW THAT WE'VE GOT SOME
SOME BUY-IN ALREADY FROM OUR
STATE LEGISLATIVE DELEGATION ON
THIS ISSUE.
IT'S NOT THAT THEY'RE NOT AWARE
OF THIS BUT JUST TO HAVE OUR
POLICY DOCUMENTS SUPPORTING US
.
YEAH, ERICA, I DON'T THINK
YOU'RE INCORRECT BUT I THINK
THE LANGUAGE IF SOMEONE WANTS
TO JUST TALKS ABOUT PROVIDING
SAFE CROSSINGS SO THAT MAY BE
UNDER OVER AND I THINK YOU'RE
RIGHT AT GRADE CROSSINGS ARE
NOT ACCEPTABLE FOR HIGH SPEED
RAIL BUT THIS DOESN'T
NECESSARILY CALL OUT THE
DISTINCTION BETWEEN UNDER OVER
AT GRADE.
I THINK IT JUST TALKS ABOUT
SAFE AND LEAVES IT TO A BIGGER
POLICY TYPE ISSUE.
SO DOES SATISFY YOU ARE YOU
LOOKING TO GIVE OTHER LANGUAGE
IN MINE?
I WAS JUST GOING TO RECOMMEND
ADVOCATE FOR THE STATE
LEGISLATURE AND RAIL OPERATORS
SO THAT WE ARE ADDRESSING THE
FACT THAT IT MIGHT BE A
LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SEEMS LIKE
THAT'S A REASONABLE AND JUST
ADD THE LEGISLATURE TO THE
THANK YOU.
I THINK THAT'S A GOOD THING
THAT THE STATE LEGISLATURE I
MEAN I KNOW THAT THERE ARE
RESTRICTIONS ABOUT AT GRADE
CROSSINGS BUT IF THERE'S A SAFE
WAY TO DO THEM THEN I GUESS I'D
LIKE TO HAVE THAT AS AN
OPTIONAL HONEST BULLET POINT.
I GUESS I'D ALSO LIKE TO I
WONDER IF WE NEED TO SAY
SOMETHING ABOUT STUDYING THE
IMPACT OF THE KIND OF THING
THAT THEY'RE PROPOSING WITH THE
RESTRICTING ACCESS WITH FENCES
AND SO FORTH LIKE IT IS THAT I
THING THAT WE SHOULD BE ASKING
FOR IS AN IMPACT ANALYSIS
OF WHO'S GOING TO BE CUT OFF
AND WHERE THEY'RE GOING AND
RIGHT NOW THEY'RE DOING IT
WITHOUT ANY REGARD TO WHO IS
CROSSING AND WHY.
AND I IT JUST FEELS TO ME THAT
WE NEED TO MAKE THAT A
REQUIREMENT BEFORE WE LET THEM
PUT FENCES AROUND THE RAILS IN
OUR CITY SO I GUESS IT'S KIND
OF A QUESTION FOR THE EUROPEAN
ONES BUT THAT BETTER IN THE
LOCAL SECTION OF THIS IS
SPECIFIC TO THAT PROJECT OR I
MEAN IF IF THAT IS GOING TO BE
DOING ADDING AND FENCES TO KEEP
PEOPLE FELT LIKE THEY NEED TO
BE UNDERSTANDING THE IMPACT
OF WHAT THEY'RE DOING.
IT IS AT THE POINT OF PROPOSING
THAT THE WHERE THE BEST PLACE
TO GET SOMETHING LIKE THAT OK
THAT'S WHERE I MEAN PERFORMANCE
IMPACT ANALYSIS BEFORE ADDING
ANY RESTRICTIONS
.
>> I THINK THAT'S SO YEAH I
JUST ADDED SOME LANGUAGE
OF CROSSINGS TO BE ELIMINATED
AND AN IMPACT ASSESSMENT OUR
ANALYSIS SHOULD BE PERFORMED OR
RESTRICTIONS IT IS THAT DOES
THAT CAPTURE THE INTENT OF WHAT
YOU'RE SUGGESTING?
YEAH, I MEAN I GUESS
SPECIFICALLY LIKE UNMARKED OR
ILLICIT CROSSINGS THE WOULD BE
IMPACTED BY THE LIKE BY THE
FENCES LIKE I DON'T THINK THAT
THERE I HAVEN'T SEEN THAT
THEY'RE PROPOSING TO REMOVE ANY
ANY MARKED CROSSINGS AS PART
OF THE WHAT THEY'RE PROPOSING
BUT I SUPPOSE MAYBE THEY ARE
TALKING ABOUT REMOVING AT GRADE
CROSSINGS.
IS THAT IN PLAY ALSO LIKE
GATTI'S OR.
WELL THERE'S YEAH I MEAN
GENERALLY SPEAKING I'M I'M NOT
AN EXPERT WHEN IT COMES TO RAIL
BUT GENERALLY SPEAKING THERE
ARE A LOT OF FEDERAL PROGRAMS
AND RAIL OPERATORS TRY TO
MINIMIZE THE NUMBER
OF CROSSINGS PERIOD NOT JUST
FOR BIKES PED'S BUT ALSO FOR
VEHICLES BECAUSE THOSE
REPRESENT CONFLICT POINTS FOR
THEM AND DELAY FOR THEIR
NETWORK AS WELL AS THE OTHER
NETWORKS.
SO LIKE THERE'S THERE'S A
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
FUNDING GRANT FOR LIKE CROSSING
ELIMINATION WHETHER THAT MEANS
BRIDGES OR TUNNELS OR THINGS
LIKE THAT, THAT'S A REAL SO I
THINK I THINK THAT IS PROBABLY
SOMETHING THAT'S SOMEWHAT IN
PLAY.
I DON'T HEAR A LOT
OF DISCUSSION ABOUT THAT
NECESSARILY HERE BECAUSE THERE
AREN'T A LOT OF GOOD OPTIONS.
BUT YOU KNOW, IF YOU LOOK AT
BIG CITIES CHICAGO THERE'S THIS
IS A CONSTANT THING THEY'RE
TRYING TO SOLVE FOR SO I'M
BEING BECAUSE I WAS STRUCK BY
HOW THEIR FOCUS WAS JUST
ELIMINATING ACCESS SO THAT
PEOPLE COULD NOT GET ONTO THE
TRACKS WITH NO THOUGHT HOW ELSE
IT WAS GOING TO AFFECT THE
COMMUNITY.
>> I MEAN THAT'S WHAT I TOOK
AWAY FROM THE MEETING THAT I
WENT TO AND MAYBE WE COULD JUST
ASK IF CROSSING PARENTHESES
MARKED OR UNMARKED ARE TO BE
ELIMINATED.
OK, DOES THAT GET TO OK BITE
THE BULLET POINT ABOVE THIS?
IT KIND OF SKIPPED OVER BUT I'M
SURE THERE ARE MANY COMMENTS ON
THE REQUEST THAT WE HAVE TO
KEEP FROM THAT TO FURTHER
DEFINE AND CONSISTENTLY TO
THEIR COMPLETE STREETS AND
VISION ZERO POLICIES INCLUDING
CONGESTION PRICING TOLLS OR ABM
TAX ANYTHING MORE OR THAT
PEOPLE WANT TO SAY ABOUT THAT
COMPLETE STREETS OF VISION ZERO
OR I DON'T THINK ANYTHING IS
CHANGE.
>> I DON'T THINK THEY HAVE ANY
NEW POLICIES.
I THINK THEY ASSUME THEY STILL
HAVE THESE POLICIES AT THE
STATE LEVEL.
THERE'S NOT MUCH ANYTHING
SPECIFIC HERE OTHER THAN
ENCOURAGING THEM TO CONTINUE TO
PURSUE THOSE.
>> BUT OK, YEAH I DID I THINK I
PUT IT IN THE REPORT THERE THEY
ARE REASSESSING I THINK THEY'RE
COMPLETE STREETS POLICY
CURRENTLY ON THEY HAVE PUBLIC
COMMENT ON THAT RIGHT NOW.
SO I THINK IT'S STILL IN THE
BOOKS AND I'M NOT NECESSARILY
SUGGESTING IT'S GOING TO GO
AWAY OR ANYTHING BUT I THINK
THEY'RE ON THERE SEEKING INPUT
ON THAT RIGHT NOW.
ALL RIGHT.
AND THEN MOVING ALONG ADVOCATE
FOR INCREASED TRANSIT FUNDING.
THERE'S A CHANGE HERE FROM WE
SAID BOTH LOCAL AND REGIONAL TO
JUST STATEWIDE.
IS THERE A REASON FOR THAT
CHANGE?
>> I'M CURIOUS.
>> YEAH, I THINK THIS WAS ONE
OF THE PROPOSALS FROM THE RIGHT
AT WHAT I INTERPRETED IT TO
MEAN WAS JUST TO KIND OF CLEAN
UP SOME OF THAT LANGUAGE IF YOU
HAVE A DIFFERENT TAKE ON IT OR
I'LL I'LL JUMP IN.
>> THERE ARE MAYBE 70 80
TRANSIT AGENCIES ACROSS THE
STATE AT THE STATE LEVEL IT'S
ONE POT OF MONEY THAT GETS
DISTRIBUTED BY FORMULA.
SO TO ASK FOR TO ASK THE STATE
FOR MORE FUNDING FOR OUR LOCAL
TRANSIT AGENCY AND HEY GUYS, I
LOVE THAT THAT'S IF WE WANT TO
DO THAT THAT'S THAT'S WONDERFUL
.
BUT THIS WILL ALIGN WITH OTHER
ADVOCATES LIKE THE MICHIGAN
PUBLIC TRANSIT ASSOCIATION WHO
SORT HAVE RECOGNIZED A UNIFORM
APPROACH ASKING A STATE TO
INCREASE FUNDING FOR ALL THE
TRANSIT AGENCIES HAS A GENERAL
GENERALLY BETTER EXCUSE A
BETTER CHANCE OF APPEALING TO
THE ENTIRETY OF THE LEGISLATURE
BECAUSE EVERYONE ACROSS THE
STATE BENEFITS.
>> THIS IS I THINK A CHANGE IN
THAT REGARD.
IF THE COMMISSION FEELS
STRONGLY ABOUT THE ORIGINAL
WORDING, I CERTAINLY CAN GO
EITHER WAY ON THAT EXPERT
EXPLANATION.
IT MAKES SENSE TO ME.
I'M NOT SURE IF ANYONE ELSE HAS
ANY OBJECTIONS SO THERE'S NO
INTEREST IN REQUESTING A
RECONSIDERATION OF THE FORMULAS
OR HOW THE PIE IS SLICED OR
ANYTHING.
IT'S JUST AN INTEREST IN
INCREASING THE SIZE OF THE PIE
.
THAT'S HOW I INTERPRETED THIS
BUT FROM YOUR PERSPECTIVE
THOUGH I MEAN OR DO YOU WANT TO
MAKE A STATEMENT THAT WE
DESERVE A BIGGER PIECE OF THE
PIE OR ANYTHING LIKE THAT?
>> I, I I WOULDN'T TOUCH THAT
WITH A TEN FOOT POLE OR
CHANGING THESE FUNDING FORMULAS
IS ABOUT THE MOST RADIOACTIVE
THING YOU CAN DO IN LANSING AND
WOULD MAKE US UNPOPULAR WITH
EVERY OTHER TRANSIT AGENCY IN
THE STATE.
SO I THE RIDE WILL NOT SUGGEST
THAT AND I WOULD ENCOURAGE THIS
COMMISSION TO CONSIDER THAT.
>> I JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THANK YOU ARONOFF ADVOCATE FOR
THEM NOT TO ALLOW BUS AND
SHOULDER OPERATIONS ON KEY
FREEWAY SEGMENTS.
>> THIS IS A NEW ONE THIS YEAR.
IS ANYTHING YOU WANT TO SAY
ABOUT THIS?
SURE.
AND YOU'LL SEE IT LOOKS LIKE
RAYMOND'S CAUGHT A LOT OF THE
THINGS THAT I SENT HIM
ADMITTEDLY VERY, VERY RECENTLY.
SO THANK YOU, RAYMOND FOR
CATCHING UP, TRYING TO
CONSOLIDATE COMMENTS AT BOTH
THE STATE AND LOCAL IN THE LAST
YEAR'S AGENDA AND ADD A FEW
OTHER THINGS TO BRING IT UP TO
SORT OF CONSISTENCY WITH THE
RIDES EMERGING LEGISLATIVE
AGENDA, OUR LONG RANGE PLAN,
THE REGIONS PLANS AND AGAIN AND
THE STATUS TO ALLOW BUS ON
SHOULDER OPERATION IS SORT OF A
COMPLEMENT TO THE ALLOW BUS
LANES ONE A FEW BULLETS
EARLIER.
THIS IS BASICALLY THAT ON BUT
IT'S THAT BUT FOR FREEWAYS SO
BUS ON SHOULDER OPERATIONS IF
YOU'RE NOT AWARE OF IT VERY
COMMON IN MINNESOTA FOR
EXAMPLE, IF THERE IS TRAFFIC
CONGESTION THAT HAS BLOCKED THE
REGULAR TRAVEL LANES, THE
BUSSES IN MINNEAPOLIS ARE
ALLOWED TO GO ON TO THE
SHOULDER TO BYPASS THE TRAFFIC
.
NO ONE ELSE HAS THIS ALLOWANCE.
IT'S JUST SOMETHING THEY DO FOR
BUSSES ONLY ON FREEWAY LIMITED
ACCESS ARTERIAL SORT
OF OPERATIONS.
SO THAT WOULD BE SOMETHING THAT
WE'D SUGGEST IT WOULD ONLY BE
APPLICABLE RIGHT NOW IN THE
NINETY FOUR AND US TWENTY THREE
CORRIDORS WHERE THE AIR RIDE
MICHIGAN FLIER SERVICE OPERATES
AND THE DETROIT AND ARBOR
SERVICE.
BUT IN THE FUTURE WE HOPE TO
HAVE MORE EXPANSIVE LONGER
DISTANCE PARK AND RIDE OPTIONS
AND IT COULD BE VERY USEFUL IN
THOSE AREAS.
ANY OBJECTIONS TO HAVING THAT
IF THAT NEXT ONE IS ALSO NEW,
I'D ENCOURAGE THE STATE TO
CONSIDER ALLOWING ROAD PRICING
TO REPLACE THE DIMINISHING GAS
TAX ASSUMING DUE TO WHAT
HYBRIDS AND ELECTRIC VEHICLES?
I THINK THAT WAS ANOTHER ONE
OF MY SUGGESTIONS SOLVE.
I'LL TAKE THE BULLET FOR THAT
ONE.
THIS IS PROVOCATIVE.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU GUYS HAVE
THE TASTE FOR SOMETHING LIKE
THIS BUT YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT BRETT AS EVS AND OTHERS
ARE MORE COMMON THE AMOUNT
OF GAS BEING SOLD IS NOT WHAT
IT WAS.
THE AMOUNT OF MONEY TAKEN IN BY
THE STATE TO PAY FOR ROADS IS
NOT WHAT IT WAS.
THOSE OF US IN THE INDUSTRY
KNOW THAT AT SOME POINT THERE
WILL BE A BREAK AND THE NEW
SOURCE OF REVENUE IS GOING TO
BE NEEDED.
ASIDE FROM THE GAS TAX, A LOT
OF PEOPLE ARE LOOKING AT ROAD
PRICING FOR ODOMETER TAXES THAT
ARE SOMETIMES CALLED AS A WAY
TO DO THIS.
I DON'T SEE THIS AS SOMETHING
THAT WOULD BE ACCOMPLISHED IN
THE NEXT FIVE YEARS BUT
SOMETHING TO SORT OF PUT US AT
THE VANGUARD OF THAT DISCUSSION
.
I THINK I MAY HAVE A SUGGESTION
WHICH IS INSTEAD OF SUGGESTING
OR SUGGESTING A REPLACE, JUST
SAY CONSIDER ALTERNATIVES TO
REPLACE DIMINISHING GAS TAX
REVENUES.
I MEAN MAYBE SOMEBODY WOULD
WANT TO DO IT BASED ON VEHICLE
WEIGHT OR SOME OTHER
COMBINATION OF BUT I DON'T KNOW
UNLESS YOU WELL WHAT THE STATE
HAS TRADITIONALLY DONE WITH AN
IDEA LIKE THAT IS TO SAY THAT
SOUNDS GREAT.
WE'LL TAKE IT FROM THE SCHOOLS
.
SO TO LEAVE IT OPEN TO ANY
ALTERNATIVE ALLOWS THE
LEGISLATURE TO SORT OF SHIFT
MONEY IN POTS THEY ALREADY HAVE
MOVING TO ROAD PRICING
CREATES
A MORE DIRECT USER PAY
RELATIONSHIP WHEN PEOPLE ARE
DRIVING AND INCREASES THE
DIRECT COSTS OF THAT ACTIVITY
AS OPPOSED TO SHIFTING IT FROM
SCHOOLS OR MEDICAL CARE OR
SOMETHING ELSE.
>> OK, I HADN'T THOUGHT ABOUT
THAT.
YEAH, I APPRECIATE THAT.
MOLLY, COULD YOU EXPLAIN ROAD
PRICING?
SURE.
AND RAYMOND CAN JUMP IN.
I GET IT WRONG BASICALLY THE
IDEA IS YOU PAY FOR THE AMOUNT
OF DRIVING THAT YOU DO THE
PHRASE ODOMETER TAXES SOMETIMES
USED BUT THE BASIC IDEA IS YOU
PAY PER MILE THE THE CLINCHER
HOW DO YOU TALLY THE MILEAGE?
OBVIOUSLY WE'RE NOT CALLING
EVERY CAR IN CHECKING THEIR
ODOMETER EVERY YEAR BUT THERE
ARE VARIOUS WAYS TO DO DOING
CONGESTION PRICING IS ONE
EXAMPLE OF THIS TYPE OF THING.
>> IT'S A BIT IT'S A BIT BOLD
AND IT'S PROBABLY A BIT LONG
TERM.
I'M NOT SURE MICHIGAN IS READY
FOR IT BUT DOESN'T MEAN WE
CAN'T CONSIDER YEAH.
ANOTHER TERM THAT I HEAR USED A
LOT IS VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED
TAX VMT TAX ODOMETER TAX
SIMILAR TO WHAT MATT SAID TO
MAKE A DISTINCTION.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS CONGESTION
PRICING MIGHT BE A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT.
>> THIS IS LIKE PEAK HOUR A
HIGHER RATE IF YOU WILL, IF
YOU'RE TRAVELING AT PEAK HOURS
WHETHER IT BE AT PEAK OR POP,
THE IDEA IS TO HELP OFFSET SOME
OF THE CONGESTION BY GETTING
PEOPLE TO CHOOSE EITHER OTHER
FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION DURING
THOSE TIMES OR YOU KNOW, IF
THEY HAVE DISCRETIONARY TRIPS
TO NOT MAKE THEM AT THAT TIME.
SO YOU KNOW, I KNOW SOME
OF THESE THE ROAD PRICING VMT
TAX WAS TESTED OUT.
>> PACIFIC NORTHWEST STATE
COMPACT WAS WORKING IN
WASHINGTON A COUPLE OF YEARS
AGO.
THERE'S TALK OF CONGESTION
PRICING COMING OUT OF NEW YORK
CURRENTLY.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S ACTUALLY
MADE IT.
THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
SO THESE ARE THESE CONCEPTS ARE
NOT NEW IN OTHER PARTS OF THE
WORLD BUT THEY'VE HAD A HARD
TIME STICKING IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> BUT AS MATT ALSO SAID, WE
HAVE ACTUALLY ALREADY CROSSED
OVER THE THRESHOLD WHERE THE
FEDERAL GAS TAX AND STATE TAXES
ARE NO LONGER SOLVENT.
THEY NO LONGER FUND THEY NO
LONGER BRING ENOUGH REVENUE TO
FUND THE TRANSPORTATION BILLS.
SO THEY'RE ALWAYS INFUSED WITH
ADDITIONAL REVENUE FROM THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR STATE
GOVERNMENTS OR OTHERS.
SO YOU KNOW THIS IDEA ABOUT
DIMINISHING RETURNS ON GAS
TAXES, REAL AND ONE OTHER THING
I'LL MENTION IS ELECTRIC
VEHICLES ARE PART OF THE
DISCUSSION BUT ALSO CAFE
STANDARDS IN GENERAL LIKE CARS
ARE JUST BECOMING MORE FUEL
EFFICIENT.
SO IN TOTAL, YOU KNOW, THE
NUMBER OF PERCENTAGE
OF VEHICLES THAT ARE ELECTRIC
ARE STILL RELATIVELY SMALL
COMPARED TO THE OVERALL FLEET.
BUT AS MILES PER GALLON
INCREASES, WHY FOR EVERY OEM
THAT'S REALLY WHAT'S TAKING A
LOT OF THE TOLL ON THE AMOUNT
OF GAS TAX THAT'S GENERATED IS
THAT BACK IN MY LAST JOB IN LAS
VEGAS AND THAT'S REALLY WHERE
THE HIT WAS COMING FROM AND I
BELIEVE SOME STATES INCLUDING
ADDITIONAL FEE IN THE ANNUAL
REGISTRATION YOU KNOW, IF IT'S
A HYBRID THEN THEY PAY AN EXTRA
FOUR HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR THE
REGISTRATION AND IF IT'S ABOVE
AN EXTRA X NUMBER OF DOLLARS IS
THAT I MEAN I JUST DON'T WANT
TO PRESCRIBE A SOLUTION HERE
BUT I THINK WE'RE KIND OF WE'RE
KIND OF DOING THAT YOU KNOW,
NOT PRESCRIBING A SOLUTION,
PUTTING EXAMPLES HERE.
SO I'M FINE WITH HOW IT READS
NOW BUT THAT'S SOMETHING ELSE
THAT I THINK I'VE SEEN STATES
DO.
IT'S JUST AN ANNUAL FEE FOR
THOSE TYPES OF VEHICLES WHICH
IS A KNOWN THING.
THEN YOU HAVE TO TRY TO FIGURE
PART PEOPLE DRIVEN IN A STATE
THAT DOESN'T HAVE INSPECTIONS
OF SUCH A MULTI SORRY MOLLY
THANKS.
YEAH I SO I'M FINE GIVING
EXAMPLES BUT I DON'T I DON'T
WANT TO TAKE AWAY BASED I WOULD
LOVE TO INCLUDE WEIGHT BASED
PRICING ON THE LIST.
THERE ARE OTHER BENEFITS TO
DISINCENTIVES I THINK HEAVY
VEHICLES WE KNOW THAT HEAVIER
VEHICLES ARE DEADLIER VEHICLES
AND SO WHILE I RECOGNIZE THAT
THE KEY ARGUMENT IN THIS BULLET
IS ABOUT FUNDING, I'D LOVE TO
KEEP WEIGHT BASED ON THE TABLE
.
OK, I LIKE THE WAY THIS READS
NOW ANY OTHER COMMENTS ERIKA?
I THOUGHT I JUST WANTED TO
CHIME IN THAT WE CHARGE FOR
ELECTRIC VEHICLES WE'RE OFTEN
SABOTAGING OUR TRANSITIONS A
CLEANER ENERGY SUPPLY SO
THERE'S MORE CRITICISM'S THAT
THAT FEE THAT WE HAVE.
SO ANYWAY GO ON RECORD ON THAT
ONE FOR LET'S SEE WHAT'S NEXT
STATEWIDE CROSSWALK LAW SO
ADVOCATING THAT THE STATE ADOPT
ESSENTIALLY AN ARBOR'S STATE
CROSSWALK THIS ONE HAS BEEN
AROUND FOR A FEW YEARS.
WELL, BASICALLY WHERE DRIVERS
ARE REQUIRED TO STOP AND YIELD
TO PEOPLE WHEN THEY'RE WAITING
AT CROSSWALK NOT JUST IN THE
CROSSWALK.
THAT'S THE DISTINCTION IS
DIFFERENT IN ANN ARBOR.
SO WE'RE ADVOCATING THAT THE
STATE ADOPT THAT ANY COMMENT ON
THIS ONE NEXT.
THIS IS A ABDICATING A REVISION
TO THE TRAFFIC CONTROL MANUAL
TO EXPAND SIGNAGE OPTIONS FOR
BIKE LANES INCLUDING THE
MAYHEW'S FOR LANE WHICH I KNOW
I'VE SEEN AROUND ANN ARBOR BUT
IT'S NOT IN THE MICHIGAN AVENUE
TCG.
RAYMOND, IS THAT STILL AN
APPLICABLE ASK?
>> HAVE THEY MADE THAT CHANGED?
YOU KNOW YOU KNOW, ADMITTEDLY I
I DON'T KNOW.
I MIGHT NEED TO DO SOME
RESEARCH ON THAT.
I DON'T REMEMBER SEEING
ANNOUNCEMENT I REMEMBER THE
ADVOCACY ON THIS FOR THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS BUT TO MY
KNOWLEDGE THIS THIS IS STILL
APPROPRIATE BUT I CAN JUST
DOUBLE CHECK IT DOESN'T HURT.
>> OBVIOUSLY A BENEFIT HAS
HAPPENED SO THEN IT'S ALSO JUST
GENERALLY ASKING FOR EXPANDED
OPTIONS INCLUDING THAT ONE
PARTICULAR.
SO ANY COMMENTS ON THIS OR ANY
ADDITIONS OR ANYTHING PEOPLE
WANT TO ADD TO THIS ONE?
ALL RIGHT.
THE NEXT ONE I THINK WE HAD TO
LAST YEAR ADVOCATE FOR
LEGALIZATION OF VIDEO
SURVEILLANCE AND AUTOMATED
TRACKING AND NOTIFICATION
OF SPEEDING AND TRAFFIC
VIOLATIONS.
SO I THINK THE UPDATE IS DIDN'T
THIS TO SOME EXTENT THE IS IT
NOW ALLOWED IN CONSTRUCTION
ZONES ON HIGHWAYS, SOMETHING
LIKE THAT?
YEAH.
THE LAST I HEARD THERE WAS
LEGISLATION BEING CONTEMPLATED
TO ALLOW LIKE YOU SAID ON
FREEWAYS ON MY ONLY PROJECTS TO
ALLOW FOR SOME SORT AUTOMATED
ENFORCEMENT.
I KNOW WHEN WE WERE TALKING TO
OUR LEGAL WE WERE JUST SAYING
THAT IF THE IDEA IN THAT
INSTANCE IS TO PROTECT
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS, THOSE
BEING CONSTRUCTION WORKERS ON
THE FREEWAY, THERE ARE OTHER
INSTANCES OF VULNERABLE ROAD
USERS THAT YOU KNOW, IF YOU FLY
CRASH LOCATIONS ON ARTERIALS OR
OTHER LOCAL ROADWAYS THAT THAT
JUSTIFICATION SHOULD EXPAND
BEYOND JUST FREEWAY OPERATIONS
.
SO BUT I'M NOT AWARE THAT THE
LEGISLATION PASSED BUT AGAIN, I
CAN LOOK INTO THAT LIKE I DON'T
THINK WE NEED TO KNOW FOR THIS
BUT ANY COMMENTS OR REQUESTS
FOR THIS?
I THINK PEOPLE WANT TO ADD
ABOUT THIS FOR LULIE.
I AGAIN GIVEN THAT THERE'S A
GROWING BODY OF RESEARCH ABOUT
THE WAY THAT AUTOMATED
ENFORCEMENT EVEN WHEN THAT'S
THE BEST TIME LEARN EVEN WHEN
THERE ARE ATTEMPTS TO BE
EQUITABLE ABOUT THE DEPLOYMENT
OF THESE SYSTEMS, THEY OFTEN
END UP HAVING INEQUITABLE
IMPACTS FOR A WIDE VARIETY
OF REASONS.
I WOULD LOVE TO HAVE IN THE
SAME BREATH THAT WE'RE
ADVOCATING FOR VIDEO
SURVEILLANCE AND AUTOMATED
ENFORCEMENT, SOME REQUIREMENT
FOR DATA COLLECTION AROUND
DISPARATE IMPACTS SO THAT AT
MINIMUM WE KNOW IF IT'S NOT
WORKING OUT WE KNOW AND CAN
ADVOCATE IN SUBSEQUENT YEARS
THAT THERE ARE CHANGES TO THE
PROGRAMS.
>> THE SMART EDITION THAT'S NOT
GOOD.
I WAS GOING SAY I KNOW THAT
I'VE GENERALLY BEEN OUT
OUTVOTED ON THIS ONE SO I'M
TRYING TO FIND SOMETHING THAT
MIGHT BE A MIDDLE GROUND.
I LIKE THAT ED. I THINK THAT'S
I THINK THAT'S A SMART THING TO
DO.
I I JUST WANT TO SAY THAT I'M
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT AGREE WITH
MOLLY ON THIS AND I MIGHT LIKE
TO GO FURTHER AND AND SAY IT
LOCALLY IF IF THESE ARE
AVAILABLE THAT WE NEED TO HAVE
SOME VERY STRICT REQUIREMENTS
ABOUT HOW WE DEPLOY THEM AND
WHO GETS THE REVENUE.
AND YOU KNOW, I DO NOT WANT
THIS I DO NOT WANT A SYSTEM
LIKE THIS TO BECOME A REVENUE
GENERATING MACHINE FOR A
PRIVATE CORPORATION.
I AM ONE HUNDRED PERCENT NOT OK
WITH THAT.
>> I THINK THAT I DON'T KNOW
WHERE THE RIGHT PLACE TO
REFLECT THAT IS
BUT I'M A
LITTLE UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THIS
WITH HAVING THIS LINE ITEM IN
THERE WITHOUT HAVING SOME SOME
GUARDRAILS AROUND HOW WE WOULD
DEPLOY IT IF IT BECAME LEGAL I
THINK THAT MIGHT BE A BRIDGE WE
CROSS LATER OR WE COULD INCLUDE
IT IN THE ASC.
SO SOMETHING LIKE ADVOCATE FOR
LEGALIZATION OF MUNICIPAL
MUNICIPAL DEPLOYED VIDEO
SURVEILLANCE OR NON PRIVATE OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
I MEAN OK, I GUESS I WOULDN'T I
WASN'T AWARE THAT THERE ARE
RESTRICTIONS AGAINST
MUNICIPALITIES OWNING OPERATING
THESE.
I JUST THOUGHT THAT IT WAS LIKE
TECHNOLOGICALLY DIFFICULT FOR
THEM TO ACHIEVE OR
PROHIBITIVELY EXPENSIVE MEETING
YOU KNOW, COMPUTER RELATED HIGH
TECH COMPUTER RESOURCES TO
IMPLEMENT THEM.
>> SO I'M NOT I THINK THEIR
STATE IS THERE ANY WAY THEY CAN
EXPAND?
YEAH.
WITH YOUR STATE LAWS
PROHIBITING SPEED CAMERAS AND
THE LIKE.
>> YEAH, YOUR STANDING IS
AUTOMATED.
ENFORCEMENT IS NOT ALLOWED IN
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN.
RIGHT.
BUT SPECIFICALLY THERE'S
NOTHING PROHIBITING IN AREAS
WHERE THEY ARE ALLOWED.
IT'S NOT THAT MUNICIPAL THESE
ARE DISALLOWED FROM USING.
IT'S JUST THAT IT WOULD BE
DIFFICULT FOR A MUNICIPALITY TO
DO IT AS AM I MAKING SENSE.
>> THEY'RE LIKE I'M NON WELL I
THINK WHAT YOU'RE GETTING AT IS
IT YOU'RE RIGHT IT IS NOT
UNCOMMON FOR MUNICIPALITIES WHO
CONTRACT THIS WORK OUT TO THIRD
PARTIES THAT HAVE THE
TECHNOLOGY OUT OF BOX SOLUTION
AND THEN YOU KNOW, THEY THEY
EITHER HAVE A FLAT FEE OR THEY
GET SOME FEE BASED OFF OF THE
NUMBER OF TICKETS ISSUED OR
WHATEVER THE CASE MAY BE.
I'M NOT TOO FAMILIAR WITH THE
DIFFERENT FUNDING MODELS BUT I
THINK IT PETE I'M GOING TO TRY
TO READ A LITTLE BIT INTO SOME
OF YOUR CONCERNS.
SOME STATES AND COMMUNITIES
HAVE GOTTEN INTO TROUBLE
BECAUSE YOU KNOW, THESE PRIVATE
COMPANIES ARE LEFT UNCHECKED
AND THEY WERE KIND
OF FLAGRANTLY ISSUING TICKETS.
FOR EXAMPLE, RED LIGHT CAMERAS
ARE ONE SO THEY'RE SPEEDING
THEN ANOTHER COMMON APPLICATION
IS RED LIGHT RUNNING CAMERAS.
IF YOU'VE BEEN IN MAJOR METROS
YOU MAY HAVE SEEN THIS BEFORE
AND SOME RESEARCH HAD BEEN
SHOWN THAT THEY WERE ISSUING
TICKETS TO VEHICLES GOING
THROUGH THE INTERSECTION ON
YELLOW AND SO, YOU KNOW, THEY
THEY WERE TRYING TO MAXIMIZE
THEIR PROFIT AND THAT'S WHEN
THOSE COMMUNITIES AND THOSE
COMPANIES GOT INTO TROUBLE.
SO IT IT IS DEFINITELY
SOMETHING KNOWN IN THIS SPACE
ABOUT AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT.
I THINK A LOT OF THE CONCERNS
THAT YOU ALL ARE RAISING ARE
APPROPRIATE AND YOU KNOW,
BEFORE ANYTHING WOULD EVER BE
ROLLED OUT AND ARBOR WOULD BE
SOMETHING THAT WE WOULD TALK TO
THIS COMMISSION ABOUT.
AND THE ONE THING I WOULD JUST
JUST SO WE DON'T GO TOO FAR
DOWN THE RABBIT HOLE, YOU KNOW,
RIGHT NOW IT'S NOT EVEN
PERMITTED.
SO TALKING ABOUT WHAT A LOCAL
ROLLOUT WOULD BE, BEAL'S YOU
KNOW, THE FIRST STEP WOULD JUST
BE TO ALLOW IT IF THAT'S
SOMETHING THIS COMMISSION WANTS
TO ADVOCATE FOR IN THIS POLICY
DOCUMENT, I THINK THAT WOULD BE
THE FIRST STEP IF IT EVER
BECOMES POSSIBLE, THEN WE CAN
ADD TO THE LOCAL BUT IT DOESN'T
SEEM TO MAKE A LOT OF SENSE TO
ADD CONDITIONS ON THE LOCAL END
THAT'S NOT EVEN PERMISSIBLE.
SO I THINK, YOU KNOW, ADDING
SOME OF THESE GUARDRAILS TO USE
ITS TERM, YOU KNOW, TALKING
ABOUT DATA COLLECTION OR THINGS
LIKE THAT TO DETERMINE
DISPARATE IMPACTS, ALL OF THAT
MAKES SENSE.
SO THEN THAT WAY TO SIGNAL TO
THE STATE WOULD BE WE THINK
THIS COULD BE A TOOL BUT IT HAS
TO BE A TOOL THAT'S KEPT IN
CHECK THAT MAKES SENSE.
SO YEAH, THAT'S JUST KIND
OF WHERE MY HEAD IS AT OR MY
RECOMMENDATION IS.
BUT OBVIOUSLY YOU CAN GO IN THE
DIRECTION YOU LIKE ON THIS.
>> YEAH, WELL I GUESS I'M I'M
UNCOMFORTABLE ASKING FOR THIS
TECHNOLOGY WITHOUT UNDERSTAND
WHAT ELSE WE NEED TO ASK FOR
THE FULL PICTURE OF WHAT ELSE
WE ASK FOR TO ENABLE IT TO BE
ROLLED OUT IN A A WAY THAT'S
ACCEPTABLE LIKE I WOULDN'T WANT
TO I WOULDN'T WANT A CAMERA
BASED TECHNOLOGY TO BE
LEGALIZED WITH RESTRICTIONS
AGAINST THE KIND OF GUARDRAILS
WE THINK WE NEED SO THAT OUR
OUR HANDS ARE TIED IMATINIB.
I'M JUST THINKING THAT MAYBE
THIS NEEDS SOME MORE THOUGHT
BEFORE IT'S WE'RE READY TO SAY
THAT WE THINK IT'S A GOOD IDEA
MORE THOUGHT ABOUT WHAT THOSE
REQUIREMENTS WOULD BE TO MAKE
IT EFFECTIVE AND ACCEPTABLE AND
EQUITABLE.
>> IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE WANT
AND OUR YEAH I I DON'T KNOW I
DON'T KNOW IF THIS IS A PLACE
TO GET INTO THE DETAILS.
I MEAN AFTER ALL THIS DOES GO
TO THE COUNCIL POLICY COMMITTEE
AND THEN THE LOBBYISTS AND
LEGISLATURES AND LEGISLATORS
BUT LOOKING AT THAT AT THE
LEVEL OF ALL OF THESE BULLET
POINTS, I DON'T KNOW IF WE
SHOULD GET INTO ANY MORE
DETAILS OR IF THERE ARE
SPECIFIC GUARDRAILS OTHER THAN
DATA COLLECTION DETERMINING
DISPARATE IMPACT.
YOU KNOW, WE CAN CONSIDER THAT
BUT YOU KNOW, I DON'T THINK WE
NEED TO DESIGN THE SYSTEM HERE
IF I HAVE AN AREA I SEE EVERY
HAND.
I'M SORRY FOR INTERRUPTING.
I DID WANT TO JUST HIGHLIGHT
ONE THING WHEN WE HAD THE
CONVERSATION I THINK A YEAR AGO
OR MAYBE EVEN THE YEAR PREVIOUS
WHEN THIS FIRST SHOWED UP THE
LANGUAGE WAS CHANGED ACTUALLY
AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT IS NOT
EVEN SUGGESTED HERE.
IT JUST TALKS ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
SURVEILLANCE TRACKING AND
NOTIFICATION.
BUT THERE'S WE TOOK OUT THE
ENFORCEMENT PIECE AND ACTUALLY
ISSUING A TICKET BECAUSE
OF SOME OF THE CONCERNS THAT
YOU ARE RAISING.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF THAT HELPS
WITH SOME OF HEARTBURN THAT I'M
HEARING FROM SOME OF THE
COMMISSION MEMBERS, BUT I THINK
THAT WAS ONE OF THE WAYS WE
TRIED TO COME TO A COMPROMISE
ON SOME OF THAT LANGUAGE LAST
TIME OR WHATEVER THAT'S WORTH.
>> THANK YOU, ERIKA AND I WAS
GOING TO PROVIDE A LITTLE BIT
MORE REASSURANCE PERHAPS THAT
IT'S NOT MY SENSE THAT OUR THAT
THIS WOULD BE A TOP PRIORITY
FOR FOR OUR LOBBYISTS TO BE
MOVING FORWARD IN LANSING.
>> AND SO WHAT WE WOULD
ESSENTIALLY BE DOING OFTENTIMES
WHEN THIS BUSINESS FOR IF WE
SAW MOVEMENT ON THIS TYPE
OF LEGISLATION FROM FROM
ANOTHER FROM A LEGISLATURE IS
SOMETHING THAT ACTUALLY GOT
INTRODUCED.
>> I KNOW IN THE PAST OUR
LOBBYIST IS WORKING WITH STAFF
AND CHECKING IN AND OBVIOUSLY
THIS IS A HOT TOPIC AND
OF PARTICULAR INTEREST IN AN
HOUR OR SO I'D EXPECT THAT IF
WE ACTUALLY SAW SOMETHING
MOVEMENT ON THIS THERE WOULD
ACTUALLY BE A FAIR AMOUNT
DEBATE OR CONVERSATION
INTERNALLY AND ALSO POTENTIALLY
WITHIN TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION IN TERMS OF DO WE
THINK THAT LEGISLATION WAS
INTRODUCED AS IS LEGISLATION WE
WANT TO SUPPORT OR NOT SO I
WOULDN'T GET TOO WORRIED ABOUT
THIS PROVIDING TOO MUCH
GUIDANCE FOR US TO OUR
LOBBYISTS TO JUST SAY SUPPORTS
THIS TYPE OF LEGISLATION.
THANKS, ERIKA.
SO UNLESS ANYONE HAS ANY WORDS
TO CHANGE US, LET'S MOVE ON.
WE CAN ALWAYS COME BACK AT THE
BOAT IF ANY OTHER THOUGHTS COME
TO MIND ON THIS THE NEXT ONE
NEXT TO I THINK ARE ARE DELETED
FROM LAST YEAR THAT YOU WANT TO
MAYBE BRIEFLY TALK ABOUT WHY
THE SECOND ONE WASN'T DELETED
BUT CHANGE IS GOING TO BRIEFLY
COVER THOSE HERE.
>> THANK YOU AND AGAIN, THESE
ARE ONES THAT I'VE SUGGESTED TO
RAYMOND FOR THE COMMISSION'S
CONSIDERATION.
>> SO THE FIRST BILL ABOUT
AMENDING THE RTA ACT IN TWENTY
NINETEEN THERE WAS A
UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORT TO TRY TO
CIRCUMVENT MCCOMB COUNTY'S VETO
POWER AT THE REGIONAL TRANSIT
AUTHORITY AND HAVE A SORT
OF RTA JUNIOR ARRANGEMENT THAT
DIDN'T GET OFF THE GROUND.
AND I'LL BE HONEST I DON'T KNOW
ANYTHING ON THE RECONNED
BROADER SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN
REGION STILL CONSIDERING IT.
SO I'M WONDERING IF THIS BULLET
IS SIMPLY OUT OF DATE AND WE
MAY BE THE ONLY ONE STILL
PUSHING FOR IT.
THE THE RTA OR SUBCOMPONENTS
OF IT HAVE OTHER LAWS THAT THEY
CAN USE IF THEY WANT TO LINK UP
AND DO SOMETHING WITHOUT MCCOMB
COUNTY.
BUT I JUST THINK AMENDING THE
LEGISLATION THAT MAY BE JUST
OBSOLETE AND WE MAY BE THE ONLY
ONE STILL PULLING FOR THAT ONE
FUNDING MECHANISMS BEYOND THE
PROPERTY TAX AND THIS KIND
OF GOES TO THE ONE WE TALKED
ABOUT BEFORE I REWORDED THE
SECOND BULLET AT THE BOTTOM
OF THE PAGE THERE TO BE MORE
INCLUSIVE, TO EXPAND TO
TRANSPORTATION AND TRANSIT
AGENCIES AND POSSIBLY THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR COULD QUALIFY AS A
TRANSPORTATION AGENCY AND ITS
EXPENSES TO TAP OTHER SOURCES
OF REVENUE AGAIN BACK TO ROAD
PRICING, VEHICLE REGISTRATION,
SALES TAX ETC. IT COVERS A LOT
OF THE SAME GROUND AS THE
DELETED SECTIONS OF THE TWO
BULLETS BUT IT'S A BIT MORE
GENERAL AND MAY EVEN BE
REDUNDANT WITH THE BULLET WE
DISCUSSED
EARLIER ABOUT ROAD
PRICING
.
>> RIGHT.
THANKS FOR THAT BACKGROUND.
I'M ENCOURAGED TO HEAR THAT
THERE ARE STILL MECHANISMS THAT
WE COULD, YOU KNOW, CIRCUMVENT
MACOMB COUNTY OR THE THE
TRANSIT AUTHORITIES IN THE
OTHER AREAS COULD STILL WORK
TOGETHER.
SO IT'S GOOD TO KNOW THAT THAT
FIRST BULLET POINT CAN BE
REMOVED WITHOUT CONCERN.
SO YEAH, DOES THE SECOND BULLET
POINT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IS IT
REDUNDANT?
WELL, THE ONE THING I WOULD
MAYBE JUST IF I MAY CHECK THE
THOUGHT IS UP ABOVE WHERE WE
TALK ABOUT NEW REVENUES.
I THINK THIS IS MEANT TO OFFSET
GAS TAX.
>> THE OTHER ONE IS JUST MORE
REVENUE IN GENERAL.
RIGHT.
AND I THINK THE BULLET POINT
DOWN BELOW REALLY TALKS ABOUT
THE OVERRELIANCE ON PROPERTY
TAX ESPECIALLY WITH LOCAL AND
REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS.
SO THEY DO FEEL SOMEWHAT
DISTINCT TO ME EVEN THOUGH
THERE IS OVERLAP, YOU KNOW THAT
VENN DIAGRAM INCLUDES A LOT
OF THE SAME TOOLS AND THE SAME
TYPES OF TAXES.
BUT ONE IS REALLY KIND OF FOR
THE STATE AND HOW IT COLLECTS
SORT OF TRANSPORTATION TAX.
THE OTHER IS JUST ALLOWING
MUNICIPAL REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS
TO DO SOMETHING OTHER THAN
PROPERTY.
I THINK ONE THING TO HELP
CLARIFY THAT IF IF I MAY
SUGGEST SOMETHING ABOUT
TRANSPORTATION AND TRANSIT
AGENCIES ACCESS TO OTHER
SOURCES OF REVENUES BEYOND
PROPERTY TAX SUCH AS ROAD
PRICING, VEHICLE REGISTRATION,
SALES TAX, ET CETERA, DOES THAT
HELP CLARIFY?
>> I LIKE IT.
>> I THINK RAYMOND SAID IT
BETTER THAN THIS IS ABOUT THE
RELIANCE ON THE PROPERTY TAX
FOR SOMETHING THAT IS
INHERENTLY A REGIONAL FUNCTION
LIKE IT'S
SO THE OIL CAN
READERS MOVE AWAY FROM LEVEL
OF SERVICE AS A MEANS TO IMPACT
TO ASSESS THE IMPACT
OF PROJECTS ON THE ROAD NETWORK
IN FAVOR OF OTHER METRICS THAT
DON'T PRIORITIZE VEHICULAR
SPEED?
>> YEAH, I DON'T KNOW THE
MECHANISM BY WHICH THIS WOULD
OCCUR.
ARE THERE DIRECTIVES WITHIN
THEM THAT I ASSUME THEY HAVE
PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES THAT
INCLUDE LEVEL OF SERVICE?
HOPEFULLY IT'S WITHIN THE
LEGISLATURES ABILITY TO DIRECT
THOSE.
HOPEFULLY THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT THE LEGISLATURE CAN DO
ASSUMING THAT'S TRUE THAT I'M
HAPPY TO TO KEEP THIS ON HERE
AND REMOVING THAT IS A IS IT A
REASONABLE ASK?
I MEAN I HOPE IT IS THAT THEY
CAN DIRECT SOME DOT TO KNOW NOT
BEING A LEGISLATIVE EXPERT.
>> I HAVE SEEN OTHER STATES
WITH AND I DON'T MEAN TO OFFEND
ANYONE BUT STATES THAT HAVE
PERHAPS MORE PROGRESSIVE VOTES
HAVE MOVED IN A DIRECTION AWAY
FROM SORT OF LEVEL OF SERVICE,
VEHICULAR LEVEL OF SERVICE.
BUT I I IT'S NOT TOO UNCOMMON
FOR STATE LEGISLATURES TO HELP
PUT THEIR WEIGHT ON THE SCALE
IF THEY'RE NOT GETTING THE SORT
OF ACTION OUT OF A STATE DOT
THAT WOULD ALIGN WITH THEIR
VALUES.
SO I I I THINK THIS IS
APPROPRIATE AND WHETHER IT'S
DIRECTED AT THE LEGISLATURE AND
I THINK IT SOUNDS GENERIC
ENOUGH THAT IT COULD GO TO
EITHER PARTIES
FOR THE MICHIGAN
DRIVE SAVE BILLS TO RESTORE THE
RIGHTS OF EVERYONE WHO WOULD BE
ELIGIBLE TO OBTAIN A DRIVER'S
LICENSE IS OK.
SO WE HAVE SOME UPDATES HERE,
SOME OF THOSE TO SIXTY FIVE TO
SIX TO SEVEN.
SO THESE ARE THE CURRENT
UPDATED BILLS FOR THE SENATE
AND THE HOUSE AND I GUESS ARE
THEY STILL MOVING THROUGH THOSE
RESPECTIVE CHAMBERS AND WE'RE
JUST PUTTING OUR WEIGHT BEHIND
AND SUPPORTING THEM?
I CAN I CAN JUMP IN BECAUSE I
THINK THIS WAS ORIGINALLY ON
BECAUSE OF MY OWN ADVOCACY.
THE THERE HAS HISTORICALLY BEEN
ENOUGH SUPPORT TO GET THESE
BILLS INTRODUCED BUT THERE HAS
NOT HISTORICALLY BEEN ENOUGH
SUPPORT TO ACTUALLY GET THEM
PASSED AND SO THEY KEEP GETTING
INTRODUCED AND THEY KEEP
SELLING OUT.
BUT THE ADVOCACY EFFORTS FOR
THESE BILLS CONTINUE.
THIS IS AN ACTIVE CAMPAIGN BY A
COALITION ACROSS THE STATE.
AND SO I THINK IT'S APPROPRIATE
FOR US TO CONTINUE TO PUT IN
OUR SUPPORT BEHIND BEHIND THESE
BILLS THAT ARE AND I THINK MATT
AND HIS TEAM HELPED PROVIDE
SOME UPDATED SENATE BILLS AND
HOUSE BILL NUMBERS.
SO THANK YOU.
I HAVE A QUESTION MAYBE BACK TO
MOLLY ANDERMATT AND OR THE
WHOLE COMMISSION.
SHOULD WE ELIMINATE THE
SPECIFIC BILL REFERENCES?
IS THE MICHIGAN DRIVE SAFE BILL
ENOUGH JUST TO KEEP IT
EVERGREEN OR DO YOU LIKE THAT
AS A POINT OF REFERENCE FOR
PEOPLE TO CROSS REFERENCE
AGAINST AND JUST THROWING THAT
IDEA OUT THERE?
>> I MEAN I WOULD BE OK WITH
REMOVING THE NUMBERS.
I DON'T KNOW.
I MEAN I FEEL LIKE I DO NOT
WANT TO TALK TO TO ERICA IN
TERMS OF WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT OUR
LOBBYIST AND WHETHER OR NOT
IT'S USEFUL TO NAME SPECIFIC
BILL NUMBERS OR WHETHER IT'S
ENOUGH TO SAY THIS IS SOMETHING
WE SUPPORT IN PRINCIPLE.
YOU KNOW, I THINK IF THIS
SPECIFIC BILL NUMBERS THERE,
IT'S ALWAYS HELPFUL.
WE'RE UPDATING THE SENATE
ANABASIS.
THE BILL NUMBERS ARE STILL I
MEAN IT'S PROBABLY IT'S
PROBABLY MORE HELPFUL TO HAVE
IT THERE THAN NOT.
WE CAN UPDATE IT BECOMES
OUTDATED I THINK BEFORE WE MOVE
ON TO THE LOCAL AGENDA, ARE
THERE ANY ASKS FOR ADDITIONS TO
THE STATE, A STATE LEVEL AGENDA
?
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO YOU KNOW, LET'S MOVE ON TO
THE LOCAL PORTION FIRST OF ALL
AND STRENGTHEN PARTNERSHIPS
WITH STAKEHOLDERS INCLUDING
APES AND YOU HAVE IT'S NOT VERY
SPECIFIC BUT YOU KNOW, I I
THINK CITY COUNCIL MEETING THIS
WOULD UNDERSTAND THE MEANING
BEHIND THIS.
SO UNLESS THERE'S AN APPETITE
TO ADD SPECIFICS TO THIS, IS
THERE ANY I DON'T OTHER
SPECIFIC THINGS THAT PEOPLE
WANT TO POINT TO ARE
PARTNERSHIPS THAT WE WANT TO
MANDATE
IF NOT, LET'S MOVE ON
TO THE SECOND GOAL AND
PRIORITIZE DATA DRIVEN DECISION
MAKING BUT USING BENCHMARKING
AND STATISTICAL DATA COLLECTION
,I THINK THE CITY STAFF DOES A
GOOD JOB ON THIS ALREADY.
VERY GOOD JOB BUT IT DOESN'T
HURT TO KEEP IT ON HERE.
I THINK ANY OTHER COMMENTS I
MIGHT USE ACCESSIBILITY AS AN
EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR
ANALYSIS OF TRANSPORTATION
INVESTMENTS
?
YEAH, I DON'T KNOW.
IT'S ALSO KIND OF GENERIC.
I DON'T KNOW THE YOU KNOW,
THESE KINDS OF THINGS.
WE NEED TO BE MORE SPECIFIC
ABOUT WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO SAY
BUT I FEEL LIKE WE I FEEL LIKE
WE CHANGED THIS LANGUAGE LAST
YEAR BECAUSE ACCESSIBILITY
GENERALLY MEANS SOMETHING
SPECIFIC WHICH IS ACCESSIBILITY
FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.
>> AND SO I THINK MAYBE I
THOUGHT WE HAD CHANGED IT TO
ACCESS LIKE USE ACCESS LIKE I
THINK WE TOOK AWAY THE AND HAD
JUST SAID ACCESS TO THINGS LIKE
ERROR TO I FORGET WHAT THE TERM
WAS IF IT WAS AMENITIES OR
RESOURCES BUT JUST WE COULD
MAYBE EVEN KEEP EXAMPLE BUT
LIKE ACCESS TO THESE THINGS AS
OPPOSED TO ACCESSIBILITIES.
YES DESTINATION'S THERE WE GO
ALONG SEVERAL SNOW DAYS AT THIS
POINT AND I THINK THAT IS GETS
MORE CLEARLY TO WHAT I THINK
THIS BOARD IS TRYING TO DO.
OK, OK, SO AS TRANSPORTATION
MANAGER RAYMOND, DO YOU READ
THIS AND UNDERSTAND KIND OF THE
MEANING BEHIND IT?
>> DO YOU THINK THAT THIS YEAH,
I THINK SO AND I THINK MOLLY
FOR BRINGING THAT BACK UP
BECAUSE I DO REMEMBER HAVING
THAT CONVERSATION IF I REMEMBER
CORRECTLY I THINK ONE RULE WAS
ONE OF THE ONES THAT WAS
BRINGING THIS UP, ESPECIALLY
PUTTING ON HIS PLANNING
COMMISSION MEMBER THIS IDEA
OF YOU KNOW, IT'S JUST PUTTING
DOWN BIKE LANES TO NOWHERE
MAYBE NOT MAY NOT BE ACHIEVING
KIND OF OUTCOMES BUT WE SHOULD
REALLY BE LOOKING AT WHAT THEY
CONNECT TO.
SO I READ THIS AND I THINK IT
MAKES SENSE AND I DO APPRECIATE
THE CLARIFICATION IS IS TRYING
TO DISTINGUISH BECAUSE YOU
KNOW, ACCESSIBILITY OFTEN
REFERS TO THINGS LIKE RELATED
TO ADA WHICH I THINK WE TALK
ABOUT A LITTLE FURTHER DOWN AND
IS IMPORTANT BUT I DON'T WANT
TO CONFLATE THOSE TERMS SO I'M
KIND OF USING A DIFFERENT TERM
SUCH AS JUST ACCESS AND THEN
GIVING THOSE EXAMPLES I THINK
HELPS CLARIFY THINGS FOR ME.
SO SO SIMILAR TO THAT THE NEXT
USE BIKE LANE ET CETERA
CONNECTIVITY AS AN IMPORTANT
METRIC BY WHICH TO PRIORITIZE
TRANSPORTATION INVESTMENTS.
SO IT SEEMS LIKE IT'S BUILDING
ON THE BULLET POINT BEFORE IT
AND SORRY TO INTERRUPT ME I
THOUGHT I SAW THE CORNER OF MY
EYE YOU HAD YOUR HAND UP SO I
JUST WANTED TO OH NO NO
I WAS
JUST GIVING YOU A THUMBS UP.
I AGREE THAT AXIS
OF DESTINATION'S OR THAT
CONNECTIVITIES IMPORTANT FACETS
ARE NOT MOSTLY JUST A THUMBS
AGREED EXPAND THE BICYCLE
PURCHASE INCENTIVE PROGRAM AND
CONSIDERING PUTTING NOT
ELECTRIC BIKES TO THIS SUNSET
THIS YEAR, IS THIS INCENTIVE
PROGRAM STILL AROUND SABRINO IT
AND SOME OF MY DISCUSSIONS WITH
MISSY STULTZ I THINK THERE'S
STILL AN INTEREST IN EITHER
REINVIGORATING THE PROGRAM,
BROADENING THE PROGRAM SO THIS
STILL FEELS RELEVANT BASED ON
MY CONVERSATIONS WITH HER I
DON'T KNOW WHAT FORM IT'S
TAKING.
I KNOW THEY'RE WORKING ON THAT
AND I'LL GET PERIODIC UPDATES
BUT I HAVEN'T BEEN FOLLOWING IT
TOO CLOSELY BUT I JUST WASN'T
SURE IF EXPAND WAS THE RIGHT
WORD OR INITIATE.
OK, TO INCREASE THE AMOUNT
OF ACTIVITY ONE FROM FIVE
PERCENT TO TWENTY PERCENT TO
THE ALFOND TRANSPORTATION FUND
.
I FEEL LIKE THAT WE THAT IS
THAT MAY BE OBSOLETE.
AND ERIKA I FEEL LIKE I NEED TO
TURN TO YOU ON THIS ONE BECAUSE
I REMEMBER IN LAST YEAR'S
BUDGET LIKE THE ACTUAL BUDGET
PROCESS IT WAS THE ARGUMENT IS
THAT THERE ARE A LOT
OF DIFFERENT SOURCES OF FUNDING
AND THERE WAS A REASON WHY WE
COULDN'T INCREASE SPECIFICALLY
THE FIFTY ONE SET ASIDE THAT
ANY OF THIS RINGING ANY BELLS
IT IS AND I WE HAD NO AGREEMENT
AND I HAD HAD A LONG
CONVERSATION WITH OUR STAFF
AROUND THIS AND FINANCE AND
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT KIND
OF WHAT WHERE CAN WE EXPAND THE
POT A LITTLE BIT AND WHAT'S
WHAT'S THE BEST WAY TO ADVOCATE
FOR IT.
AND OBVIOUSLY WE COULD DO THIS
BUT IT'S THERE MIGHT BE BETTER
STRATEGY THAN GOING AFTER FIFTY
ONE IN SOME WAYS IT'S IT'S
BETTER OFF IN SOME WAYS THE
TAKEAWAYS THAT IF I'M RECALLING
CORRECTLY TO REVISIT MY NOTES
TO MAKE SURE I AM I WILL
CORRECT THE FUTURE.
MR. HESS, PLEASE CORRECT IF I'M
SAYING SOMETHING THAT SEEMS
WILDLY INACCURATE THAT IT MIGHT
BE MORE USEFUL TO INSTEAD
OF ADVOCATING FROM FIVE TO 20
PERCENT TO SAY HERE ARE SOME
KEY PROJECTS THAT WE'RE TRYING
TO ADVANCE AND TO BE ADVOCATING
FOR THE BUDGET TO BE ENHANCED
TO TO TO ACCOMPLISH THOSE
SPECIFIC GOALS BECAUSE THEY
OFTEN TEND TO BE SORT
OF PROJECT BASED AND SO IT'S
IT'S IT JUST MIGHT BE A LITTLE
MORE EFFECTIVE IN TERMS
OF ACHIEVING GOALS
OF TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TO
TAKE A DIFFERENT APPROACH.
SO MAYBE INSTEAD OF TALKING
ABOUT THE STACK FIFTY ONE SET
ASIDE TO JUST ASK FOR
INCREASING THE FUNDING TO THE
FUND IN GENERAL REGARDLESS
REGARDLESS OF WHERE THE FUNDING
WOULD COME FROM AND I DON'T
KNOW OR IF WE MAY WANT TO TALK
NOT SPECIFICALLY ABOUT THE
FUNDS BUT RIGHT.
BUT JUST INCREASED FUNDING FOR
NON MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION
PROJECTS WITHOUT NAMING A
SOURCE OR DESTINATION, ERICA IS
THAT I THINK THAT MIGHT BE A
LITTLE BIT MORE ACCURATE IN
TERMS OF OR MORE ALIGNED WITH
WHAT THE GOALS ARE LIKE THAT I
THINK IT'S CRITICALLY IMPORTANT
TO HAVE SOME KIND OF BUDGET ASK
IN THIS LIST.
SO I THINK I THINK THAT'S A
GOOD WAY OF WORDING IT A AND
SORRY I MISSED IT WAS THE IDEA
TO JUST INCREASE THE AMOUNT
OF FUNDING FOR NON MOTORIZED
PROJECTS.
>> IS THAT KIND OF THE GIST
OF WHAT WE'RE GETTING AT?
I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
I DON'T KNOW IF WE WANT TO PUT
A NUMBER ON IT OR IF WE CAN PUT
A NUMBER ON IT.
>> BUT I MEAN, ERICA, WOULD IT
BE BECAUSE WHAT I'VE LEARNED IS
THAT IF YOU ASK THE WRONG
WORDS, IT'S IT CAN BE EASY TO
JUST HAVE THAT GET COMPLETELY
LOST SO DOES IT MAKE SENSE TO
ASK FOR THINGS LIKE YOU'RE LIKE
BASE YEAR OVER YEAR INCREASES
OF FUNDING FOR ON MOTORIZED
TRANSPORTATION OR LIKE I MEAN
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE THE THE ASK
HERE IS CLEAR FROM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION IN
TERMS OF WHAT THE DESIRE IS.
IT'S TO INCREASE FUNDING FOR
NON MOTORIZED AND ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS AND BE
PRIORITIZING THOSE YOU KNOW, IN
OUR IN OUR BUDGET IN TERMS
OF HOW TO HOW TO DO THAT.
WE HAVE TO LOOK AT THE BUDGET
EACH YEAR IN TERMS OF WHAT
WE'RE DOING.
I DON'T KNOW THAT IT'S
NECESSARY TO GET TO SAY IT YEAR
AFTER YEAR AND BECAUSE I THINK
THIS IS A PROGRAM I THINK IT'S
A GOOD CHANGE.
I CONTINUE TO ADVOCATE FOR
LOCAL LEVEL POLICY AND LAND USE
INVESTMENTS THAT ENCOURAGE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR TRANSIT
SUPPORTED DEVELOPMENT BUSINESS.
TAKE ONE BUSINESS AWAY.
I DON'T THINK IT'S JUST ONE OK
AND ALSO WE'RE NOT DONE WITH
ONE.
YEAH IT'S TRUE AND THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS
HAPPENING.
YEAH YEAH SURE.
>> YEAH.
AND THIS IS ONE OF THE CHANGES
I DIDN'T GET INCORPORATE MATT
DO YOU WANT ME TO PULL OVER THE
LANGUAGE THAT I CAN YOU AND
YOUR TEAM SUGGESTED WHICH IS
MEANT TO KIND OF I THINK
SYNCHRONIZE SOME OF THIS SO
THIS IS BIG AND SORRY FOR KIND
.
>> SO I THINK THE IDEA IS
FRAMING IT UNDER AND MAYBE MATT
I SHOULD GIVE YOU THE FLOOR BUT
I THINK THE IDEA IS FRAMING IT
UNDER A BIGGER UMBRELLA
STATEMENT AND THEN TALKING
ABOUT SOME SUBSTRATA UNDER
THAT.
SO MATT, I'LL TURN IT OVER TO
YOU AND SEE IF I FRAMED
PROPERLY OR I THINK YOU'RE ON
THE RIGHT TRACK.
>> WHAT WE ARE WE'RE TRYING TO
DO WITH THE SUGGESTION IS
CONSOLIDATE SEVERAL SORT
OF PARATRANSIT ADVOCACY POINTS
THAT WERE IN LAST YEAR'S
BULLETS.
SEVERAL OF THOSE ARE BROUGHT
VERBATIM FORWARD INTO THIS.
BUT AS AS RAYMOND WAS SAYING
SORT OF GROUP OF UNDER A
GENERAL TRANSIT BANNER AND THEN
WE ADDED A COUPLE OF OTHER
ONES.
SO LOOKING AT WHAT RAYMONDS GOT
ON THE SCREEN, YOU SEE THE HEAD
BULLET ADVOCATE FOR PUBLIC
TRANSIT BECOME INCREASINGLY
COMPETITIVE.
THAT ECHOES LANGUAGE THAT WAS
IN LAST YEAR.
WE DID ADD SOMETHING ABOUT
COORDINATING WITH THE RIDES
LONG RANGE PLAN THAT'S A BIT
OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE BECAUSE WE
LOOKED AT EIGHT TO ZERO AND THE
TRANSPORT STATION MASTER PLAN
AS PART OF COMING UP WITH OUR
PLAN.
SO WE THINK THERE'S SOME
SYNCHRONICITY THERE IN THE
TRANSIT PORTFOLIO.
THE FIRST BULLET ABOUT
CONTINUED ADVOCACY FOR LOCAL
LEVEL POLICY LAND USE
INVESTMENTS THAT IS I THINK
EXACTLY THE SAME AS LAST YEAR'S
ENCOURAGING ALL ENCOURAGING
ENCOURAGEMENT OF ALL NEW
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR THE
PUBLIC TO BE SITED ALONG
EXISTING TRANSIT ROUTES.
THAT IS NEW AND THAT'S
SOMETHING WE'RE SUGGESTING
BECAUSE SOMETIMES EVEN WHEN
LAND USE ZONING IS OPENED,
YOU'LL FIND A MUNICIPALITY OR
SOMEONE ELSE WILL PUT A REALLY
IMPORTANT PUBLIC FACILITY FOUR
BLOCKS AWAY FROM THE NEAREST
BUS ROUTE AND YOU KIND OF ARE
GOING IN TWO DIRECTIONS THERE.
THE THIRD ONE INCREASING ON
TIME TRAVEL FOR BUS ROUTES.
THAT IS VERBATIM FROM LAST YEAR
WE LOVE IT STRIVING TO MAKE
TRANSIT COMMUTING FASTER, MORE
CONVENIENT AGAIN VERBATIM FROM
LAST YEAR AND THEN THE FINAL
THREE ARE NEW ONES THAT ARE
SUGGESTIONS THAT PERTAIN TO BUS
STOP CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE.
SO I'LL STOP THERE, RAYMOND,
BUT THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SORT OF SHARE
THIS IDEA OF CONSOLIDATING
THESE INTO A SINGLE SORT
OF TRANSIT SUGGESTION AND THEN
ADDING A FEW OTHERS.
I'M HAPPY TO ANSWER QUESTIONS
OR BE HELPFUL.
I REALLY APPRECIATE THE LAST
COUPLE OF NEW ONES HERE.
I DON'T KNOW THAT FOR EXAMPLE,
THE RIDERS HAS TO PAY FEES FOR
PERMITS AND SO SO THANKS THANKS
SO MUCH FOR PUTTING SO MUCH
INTO THIS MANY COMMENTS ON THE
NEW OR SOME OF THE SOME OF THEM
ARE FROM THE PREVIOUS VERSION
BUT ANY OTHER COMMENTS WHAT'S
BEING PROPOSED HERE FOR THIS
BLOCK OF BULLET POINTS
?
>> I THINK THEY'RE ALL GREAT.
I THINK WE'LL WE'LL BE ABLE TO
REMOVE SOME THAT ARE FURTHER
DOWN SOME RIGHT.
I DO THINK THERE'S ONE MISSING
PERHAPS RAYMOND WAS THE ONE
ABOUT SNOW CLEARING IN WHAT WE
SENT THERE WAS THE THIRD ONE
TOWARDS THE BOTTOM WHICH GIVEN
THE LAST SEVENTY TWO HOURS I
THINK IS VERY APPROPRIATE JUST
HAVING TO DO WITH COORDINATION
WITH THE CITY ON SNOW REMOVAL.
THERE WE GO.
YES.
THANK YOU MATT.
SORRY TO STOP SO AND MAYBE IF I
MIGHT JUST SPEAK TO THESE THREE
A LITTLE BIT VERY BRIEFLY BUS
STOPS ARE A KEY PIECE OF PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE'RE VERY RELIANT ON THE
MUNICIPALITIES WE WORK
GENERALLY
VERY WELL WITH THE
CITY THE SYDNEY FC FC TOWNSHIP
TOWNSHIP TO CREATE BUS STOPS.
WE HAVE OVER ELEVEN HUNDRED
OF THEM THROUGHOUT THE SERVICE
AREA BUT SOMETIMES WE GET KIND
OF CAUGHT UP IN RIGHT OF WAY
MANAGEMENT WHICH IS ABSOLUTELY
A MUNICIPAL FUNCTION.
WE DON'T DISPUTE THAT BUT
ANYTHING THAT CITIES CAN DO TO
EXPEDITE THE CREATION OF THIS
BETTER BUS STOP INFRASTRUCTURE
WE THINK JUST ADVANCES THE
CITY'S OWN GOALS INCLUDING WE
HAVE ACTUALLY REALLY GOOD WORK
SO FAR WITH THEM ABOUT
COORDINATING WITH ONGOING
CONSTRUCTION PERMITTING FEES
ARE STILL KIND OF THE
SURPRISING THING AND THEY TAKE
A WHILE AND THEN SNOW
COLLECTION WE'RE RESPONSIBLE
FOR REMOVAL OF SNOW ON THE BUS
STOPS BUT THE CITY HAS A
COMPLIMENTARY PLOWING PROGRAM
FOR THE ROADS AND THAT'S WHERE
WE END UP WITH THE PILES
OF SNOW IN THE CURB OR IN THE
GUTTER THAT WE CALL LINDROS
THAT CAN BECOME SMALL MOUNTAIN
MOUNTAINOUS OBSTACLES TO
BORDERING AND LIGHTING THE BUS.
SO ANYTHING WE CAN DO THERE TO
JUST WORK WITH THE CITY TO HAVE
THE PLOWS PERHAPS AVOID
CREATING THOSE WIND ROWS WOULD
ONLY EXPEDITE THE GROWTH AND
TRANSIT RIDERSHIP.
THANKS, PETE.
MAYOR, YOU MENTIONED BUS STOP
IMPROVEMENTS AND I GUESS I'M
WONDERING THERE SEEMS TO BE A
WIDE VARIETY OF BUS STOP
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE HAVE
SOME BUS STOPS ARE JUST A SIGN
IN THE LONG EXTENSION ON GRASS
AND SOMEHOW THE CEMENT PAD AND
SOME HAVE A PLACE TO SIT IN A
SHELTER.
IS THERE A IS A STANDARD THAT
WE SHOULD BE STRIVING FOR?
IS THERE SOME MINIMUM THAT WE
SHOULD BE ASKING FOR AND THAT'S
SAYING THAT ALL OF THEM SHOULD
AT LEAST HAVE LIKE I SAID, SO
THAT SOMEONE IN A WHEELCHAIR
CAN EASILY GET TO THE BUS
INSTEAD OF HAVING TO GO ON THE
ROAD THROUGH GRASS OR I MEAN IS
THERE A DO WE NEED TO BE MORE
PRESCRIPTIVE THERE ASKING FOR
THANK YOU FOR THAT QUESTION,
PETE AND THAT IT KIND OF GETS
TO THE SECOND BULLET FROM THE
END ABOUT LEAD WALKS AND LEAD
WALK IS THAT PIECE OF CONCRETE
THAT CONNECTS THE SIDEWALK TO
THE CURB.
THAT'S THE ACCESSIBLE PATH
OF TRAVEL FOR ANYONE IN A
WHEELCHAIR FOR EXAMPLE.
IT IS OUR GOAL AT THE RIDE TO
HAVE LEAD WALKS AT EVERY BUS
STOP IN THE CITY AS WELL AS IN
IPSWICH NIPSY TOWNSHIP.
AS LONG AS THERE ARE SIDEWALKS
NEARBY THAT'S A AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES ACT REQUIREMENT.
>> SO THAT IS OUR GOAL.
THAT IS SORT OF A NEW MINIMUM
STANDARD.
I THINK IT'S CAPTURED IN THAT
BULLET THERE.
WE DON'T EXPECT THE CITY TO PAY
FOR THAT CONCRETE.
WE'LL DO THAT.
IT'S REALLY ABOUT THE
PERMITTING TO GET THAT DONE.
THAT I THINK IS THE MINIMUM
STANDARD.
>> BEYOND THAT, THE RIDE IS
ENTIRELY FINANCIALLY
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE BENCHES,
THE SHELTERS, THE POLES SIGNS
WE HANDLE ALL OF THAT AND
THAT'S USUALLY PROVIDED THROUGH
SORT OF UTILIZATION FORMULAS.
SO IF I THINK OF A BUS STOP HAS
MORE THAN 50 BUILDINGS A DAY,
WE CONSIDER IT FOR OUR SHELTER
FOR EXAMPLE.
BUT THERE ARE MANY BUS STOPS
THAT DON'T QUITE HIT THAT
THRESHOLD.
IT JUST DOESN'T SEEM TO MAKE
SENSE FOR TEN THOUSAND DOLLAR
BUS SHELTER THAT MIGHT NOT GET
USED THAT OFTEN.
SO THERE'S A DEGREE OF THAT
GOING BUT ABSOLUTELY THAT
SECOND FROM THE END ABOUT THE
LEAD WALKS THAT REALLY PERTAINS
TO MAKING THE BUS SERVICE FULLY
ACCESSIBLE FOR EVERYONE IN THE
COMMUNITY
RIGHT.
OR THE CHANGES AND LET'S MOVE
ON TO THE NEXT SECTION OR SO
SOME OF THESE CAN BE REMOVED
SO
THIS ONE ENFORCEMENT CAN
MAINTAIN CLEAR BIKE LANES.
LET'S MOVE ON THE PROGRAM.
I THINK THIS IS KIND OF STILL
OUTSTANDING.
I RECALL I MEAN IT'S I THINK IT
WAS MAYBE THOUGHT ABOUT OR
CONSIDERED BUT I KIND OF STILL
JUST HANGING OUT THERE FROM
WHAT I CAN TELL THEY DON'T HAVE
ANYTHING TO UPDATE ON THIS ONE
ROAD IMPLEMENT MAJOR STREETS
TRAFFIC CITY MANAGER PROGRAM.
I THINK WE CAN WELL WE DESIGNED
THE PROGRAM.
I GUESS WE STILL NEED TO DIRECT
RAYMOND TO IMPLEMENT IT.
SO I GUESS IF HE'S OK WITH THAT
SAYING THERE INCORPORATE COMING
INTO ALL STREET RESEARCH AND
PROJECTS AGAIN I THINK THE PLAN
IS THERE.
LET'S SEE WHAT DID YOU ON THE
STATES THAT DID THIS WAS ONE
OF THE ONES WITH THE PASSAGE
OF THE TRAFFIC CALMING THE
UPDATED TRAFFIC CALMING
RESOLUTION THAT WAS CHAMPIONED
BY THIS COMMISSION.
>> I DIDN'T KNOW IF YOU FELT
SATISFIED WHETHER THIS IS
ADDRESSED NOW OBVIOUSLY IT'S
GOING TO BE ONGOING, RIGHT.
BECAUSE THE IDEA IS TO
INCORPORATE TRAFFIC COMING INTO
RESEARCH AND PROJECTS.
SO IF YOU WANT TO KEEP THIS ON
HERE TO MONITOR THE SPACE TO
MAKE SURE THAT IS BEING DONE, I
THINK THAT'S FINE.
BUT I JUST WANTED TO FLAG THE
FACT THAT THERE YOU ALL HELP
CHAMPION SOME LEGISLATION THAT
PASSED THE LOCAL LEVEL THAT DID
INCORPORATE TRAFFIC CALMING
ELEMENTS AS A SORT
OF PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATION
INTO STREET RESURFACING
PROJECTS.
SO REALLY WHATEVER YOUR
PLEASURE IS HERE, I JUST WANTED
TO FLAG IT THAT THERE WAS SOME
MOMENTUM ON FROM LAST YEAR TO
THIS YEAR.
WELL, MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE
RIGHT.
MOLLY AND ERIKA, HOW DO YOU
FEEL ABOUT KEEPING THIS OR
REMOVING THIS?
I LOVE TO KEEP IT AND MAKE SURE
IT'S ACTUALLY HAPPENING BEFORE
WE TAKE UP THE LIST BECAUSE
IT'S SORT OF IT'S NOT ACTUALLY
HAPPENING YET BUT RIGHT.
LIKE WE'VE GOT IT'S PAST BUT
SORRY IT'S HAPPENING OK.
WELL YEAH WE'LL REPORT OUT ON
THEM OFTEN I GUESS IT'S WINTER
SO THERE'S NOT REALLY THESE
PROJECTS AREN'T HAPPENING RIGHT
NOW.
SO I'M EXCITED.
I'M EXCITED TO SEE THE OUTCOME
OF THIS BUT YEAH I DON'T KNOW
IF THAT'S I THINK I FEEL LIKE
IT DOESN'T HURT TO LEAVE IT
ANOTHER YEAR UNTIL WE ACTUALLY
GET ALL THE WAY THROUGH THE
CYCLE.
I TIMES AS I SAY I'M FINE WITH
THAT.
I PERSONALLY LOVE TO CHECK
THINGS OFF MY LIST AND THERE
WAS A SUCCESS THIS LAST YEAR OR
SO AND I'D LOVE TO SEE IT
CHECKED OFF BUT I CAN
UNDERSTAND THE DESIRE
ADDITIONAL MONITORING WE'VE GOT
FOR NEXT YEAR.
THE MAYBE MAYBE THE POLICY
DOCUMENT ISN'T THE PLACE FOR IT
ANYMORE AND MAYBE WE WANT TO
MAKE SURE IT'S IN THE WORK PLAN
WHICH I THINK WE ALREADY
APPROVED AT THE LAST MEETING
THAT WE'RE GOING TO HEAR BACK
ABOUT IT ONCE THE PLANNING IS
COMPLETE.
SO YEAH, I GUESS I COULD GO
EITHER
AND I DON'T HAVE ANY
RESERVATIONS IF YOU WANT TO
KEEP IT.
>> I WAS AT THEIR LAST MEETING
I WAS ASKED TO FLAG SOME THAT
WHERE THERE WAS PROGRESS MADE
AND THIS WAS A VERY OBVIOUS ONE
.
>> SO THAT'S ALL I WAS TRYING
TO DO HERE.
BUT WE CAN CHANGE THE WORDING
TO SOMETHING LIKE IF WE ONLY
SOMETHING LIKE IMPLEMENT THE
PREBUY TRAFFIC COMMON PROGRAM
WHICH WHICH WILL THAT WE CAN WE
CAN.
WE CAN IT'S TRUE WE IN TERMS
OF POLICY THIS HAS BEEN
ACHIEVED.
I THINK THAT THAT IS RIGHT.
SO THIS IS A POLICY DOCUMENT.
SO I THINK WE CAN I'M CHANGING
MY MIND.
WE CAN CROSS THIS OFF BUT LET'S
MAKE SURE LET'S FIND SOME OTHER
WAY TO KEEP AN EYE ON IT I
GUESS IS MY POINT.
YEAH, CERTAINLY AT THE PROJECT
LOWBOY INTEND TO LOOK AT ALL
PROJECTS THROUGH THIS LENS THAT
THIS POLICY EXISTS.
SO OK, RAYMOND, WE'RE GIVING
YOU AN OUT TO GET RID OF THE IF
YOU HAVE SOME GOOD WORDING THEN
THAT'S FINE.
>> OK,
I'M FINE WITH THAT
WORDING
.
>> YEAH THE SUGGESTED LANGUAGE
DOES ENSURE THAT THE TRAFFIC
COMING RESOLUTION PASSED IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE IS PUT TO
ACTION AND THAT TRAFFIC CALMING
IS INCORPORATED INTO ALL STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT THAT STRIKE
A GOOD BALANCE.
OK YEP.
THANK YOU.
DEFINE HOW TRANSPORTATION
INFRASTRUCTURE IS TO BE USED
AND DISTINGUISH BETWEEN LET'S
SEE WHAT DOES IT DISTINGUISH
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN STREETS,
ROADS AND ROADS?
I'M NOT SURE WHERE THIS WOULD
BE SATISFIED.
I MEAN THEY'RE INTERNAL BUT
YEAH I STRUGGLE WITH IS THIS
JUST RAYMOND HAS WRITING A MEMO
OR SOMETHING I DON'T KNOW IS
THERE DOES ANYBODY HAVE A
VISION FOR HOW THIS WOULD BE
ACHIEVED AT THE LOCAL LEVEL?
RAYMOND, DO YOU EVEN
UNDERSTANDING OF HOW YOU THINK
THIS COULD BE ACHIEVED OR IS
THIS SOMETHING THAT WE CONSIDER
GETTING RID OF ?
I'M NOT REALLY SURE
WHAT THE
INTENT IS HERE.
MY UNDERSTANDING OF THE INTENT
WAS IF YOU KIND OF FOLLOW THIS
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN STREETS,
ROADS AND ROADS ABOUT HOW MANY
AMERICAN ROADS HAVE BEEN BUILT
WITH THIS SORT OF IDENTITY
CRISIS WHERE THEY ARE BOTH HIGH
SPEED THROUGH ROADS BUT THEN
ALSO HAVE A LOT OF ACTIVITY AND
COLLECTORS AND DESTINATIONS
ALONG THEM SHOPPING AND
RESIDENCES AND THINGS LIKE THAT
.
SO THAT IS THAT CREATES THIS
SORT OF LIKE CONFLICT AND LEADS
TO CRASHES.
AND SO I THINK THE IDEA WAS,
YOU KNOW, BEING MORE AGAIN I
THINK THIS MAY HAVE COME FROM
ONE WELL BUT SO HOPEFULLY I'M
NOT PUTTING WORDS IN HIS MOUTH.
BUT I THINK THE IDEA WAS, YOU
KNOW, BEING MORE DELIBERATE
ABOUT HOW ROADS ARE CONFIGURED
,HOW THEY ARE LIKE WHAT WHAT
THEIR PURPOSES, HOW THEY'RE
SERVING, YOU KNOW, NOT JUST
VEHICLES OR BIKES OR PEDS BUT
ALSO THE ADJACENT LAND USES.
>> SO YOU KNOW, IT'S IT'S IT'S
A LITTLE HARDER ONE I THINK FOR
TO TO CONCEPTUALIZE BECAUSE
IT'S IT'S A LITTLE BIT MORE
TECHNICAL BUT I THINK FROM MY
PERSPECTIVE I THINK I
UNDERSTAND THE INTENT OF WHAT
IT MEANS AND I FULLY SUPPORT
THE INTENT THAT YOU JUST KIND
OF VERBALIZE THEIR OK ERICA, I
NEED TO TAKE THIS FOR AND I
ALSO NEED TO UNDERSTAND AND
THAT HELPS ME ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT'S BEEN ON MY LIST THAT
I'VE BEEN ASKING AND I THINK
THIS ALIGNS WITH WHAT YOU ARE
SAYING MR. HAS WHICH IS
MANIFEST IN THE FORM OF A
OF PLAN RIGHT OF WAY PLANS IN
THE SENSE THAT WE DON'T HAVE A
VERY CLEAR ARTICULATION OF HOW
WE WANT TO WHAT WHAT WHAT'S THE
DESIGN THAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR
THE PARTICULAR ROAD THAT'S BEEN
COME UP A LOT DURING ONE
DISCUSSIONS BUT I THINK IT'S
RELEVANT PRETTY MUCH EVERY ROAD
IN OUR COMMUNITY.
WHAT WHAT DO WE WANT IN THE
STREET AND HOW DOES THAT
CONNECT TO OUR OUR PRIVATE LAND
USE AS WELL BECAUSE WE'RE
ASKING FOR A DIFFERENT
SOMETHING FROM THE DEVELOPER
THERE.
WE NEED TO KNOW HOW MUCH SPACE
WE NEED.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF THAT ALIGNS
WITH PREVIOUS CONVERSATIONS THE
COMMISSION HAS HAD I DO THINK
IT'S A CONVERSATION THAT WE
NEED TO CONTINUE HAVING BOTH
HERE AND IN PLANNING
.
SO I ADDED UP BASED ON WHAT
ERICA JUST SAID AND AGAIN THIS
IS JUST THROWING OUT SOME ROUGH
DRAFT LANGUAGE THAT TOLD ME TO
CLARIFY THE POINT THAT THIS MAY
INCLUDE DEVELOPMENT OF RIGHT
AWAY PLANS AND ALIGNMENT WITH
ADJACENT LAND USES ESPECIALLY
SEE ONE AGAIN PRIOR TO
AUTHORSHIP.
HAPPY TO CHANGE THAT, DELETE IT
IF FOLKS DON'T THINK THAT'S
CAPTURING THE INTENT, I THINK
IT HELPS MAKE EVERYBODY ELSE OK
WITH LEADERSHIP MOVE AROUND,
EXPAND AND IMPROVE ITS
INFRASTRUCTURE AND POLICY TO
ENCOURAGE THE USE OF CLEAN
ENERGY VEHICLES.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGE POINTS
POLICY FOR FOUR WHEELED LIGHT
ELECTRIC VEHICLES,
ELECTRIFICATION AND DOWNSIZING
OF CITY OWNED VEHICLES IMPROVE,
IMPROVE AND EXPAND PARKING
FACILITIES FOR BIKES INCLUDING
COVERED AND LOADED PARKING
AREAS.
POSSIBLE INCENTIVES FROM THE
CITY TO ENCOURAGE THE USE
OF CLEAN ENERGY VEHICLES BY
RESIDENTS AND BUSINESSES.
ANY ADDITIONS OR CHANGES OR
DELETIONS THAT PEOPLE WANT TO
PROPOSE FOR THIS PERIOD OF NOT
AND ENABLE LOCAL POWER GRID
INITIATIVES REQUIRED BY THE WAY
TO ZERO PLAN WHICH WOULD ALLOW
FOR CARBON FREE EV CHARGING
RIGHT?
NO CHANGES IMPROVE WINTER
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE TO ENSURE
WALKABILITY ACCESSIBILITY ROUND
WITH EMPHASIS ON SIDEWALKS LOOK
TO DOWNTOWN IN RESIDENTIAL
AREAS AND THOSE NEEDED TO
ACCESS BUS STOPS MUST BE AFTER
THE LAST FEW DAYS I KIND
OF FEEL LIKE WE HAVE THE RIGHT
POLICY HERE AND I'M TRYING TO
THINK OF THE RIGHT WAY TO SAY
THAT WE NEED TO BE ENFORCING
THE REQUIREMENTS BETTER THAN
ANYONE SO SO I'M NOT LIKE I
CAN'T THINK OF A POLICY THAT I
WANT TO CHANGE.
WHAT I WANT IS TO SEE THAT WHAT
WE'VE ASKED FOR ACTUALLY PUT IN
PRACTICE IN TERMS OF PEOPLE
CLEARING IN FRONT OF THEIR
HOUSES IN FRONT OF THEIR
BUSINESSES AND LIKE CITY PLOWS
CLEARING FROM CURB TO CURB LIKE
THESE ARE ALL THE THINGS THAT
WE SAY WE'RE SUPPOSED TO DO BUT
WE'RE JUST NOT DOING SO MAYBE
THAT'S A CONVERSATION ABOUT OUR
WORK PLAN AND NOT SOMETHING
THAT WE NEED TO CHANGE IN THIS
DOCUMENT.
>> I DON'T KNOW MEAN THIS DOES
IN THE FIRST FOUR WORDS AH
IMPROVE WHEN IT'S LIKE SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE OR ENFORCEMENT
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE
ENFORCEMENT.
I DON'T KNOW IF I FEEL LIKE WE
LIKE I SAID, WE ALREADY KNOW
WHAT WE NEED TO DO OR NOT
ENFORCING.
>> SO WHAT'S THE RIGHT WAY TO
YEAH I MEAN THIS KIND OF LEAVES
IT OPEN TO ANY MEANS TO ACHIEVE
THAT WHETHER THE ENFORCEMENT OR
PROGRAMS THAT NOBODY PROGRAMS
EXPANDED CITY ASKING THE CITY
TO DO MORE ETC. ETC. SO I'M NOT
SURE IF THERE'D BE APPETITE TO
TO NARROW IT DOWN TO
ENFORCEMENT ONLY BUT IF YOU
WANT TO PROPOSE THAT BUT THIS
KIND OF LEAVES IT OPEN TO JUST
PROVING THAT I GET IT AND I'M I
AM WONDERING IT WOULD WE BE
MORE LIKELY TO GET SOME
PROGRESS ON IT IF WE SAID LET'S
JUST FOCUS ON THIS ONE PART
LIKE THIS IS A VERY BROAD
STATEMENT THAT WE'RE MAKING
HERE.
WHAT IF WE LIKE LET'S LET'S GET
WHAT WE'RE SUPPOSED TO BE
DOING.
LET'S GET IT RIGHT FIRST AND
THEN WE'LL THEN WE'LL FIGURE
OUT WHETHER WE NEED A POLICY
ADDITIONAL POLICY.
SO I'M I GUESS I AM PROPOSING
NARROWING DOWN FOR THAT REASON
ONLY CALL AND PROMINA FIRST AND
THEN THEY DO MAKE A PROPOSED
CHANGE TO THE FOUR PER UH.
>> SO THIS IS MY FIRST TIME
REALLY GOING THROUGH THIS.
WHY ARE WE FOCUSING ON
SIDEWALKS LOCATED DOWNTOWN ONLY
IS THERE A REASON WHY THIS IS
FOCUSED SOLELY ON DOWNTOWN
SIDEWALKS?
I THINK IT IS JUST TO MAKE IT
MORE MANAGEABLE AND TO FOCUS ON
THE AREAS WITH THE HIGHEST
PEDESTRIAN COUNTS.
I MEAN THIS ONE GIVES ME PAUSE
BECAUSE I MEAN I REALLY WANT TO
THINK ABOUT HOW PEOPLE ARE
GETTING DOWNTOWN OR GETTING
AROUND OUR CITY AND IF WE'RE
IGNORING WHERE PEOPLE ARE
MOVING IN COMMUNITIES THAT NEED
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND CAN'T
GET TO A BUS STOP AND MOVE
AROUND AND DON'T LIVE DOWNTOWN,
I DON'T WANT TO BE SO DOWNTOWN
CENTRIC.
WE SHOULD REALLY MAKE THIS A
CITY WIDE OR MAYBE EVEN EXPAND
THE GRID FROM THE MAIN DOWNTOWN
AREA IN MY OPINION.
>> BUT WE DID INCLUDE THE WORDS
IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS AND THOSE
NEEDED TO ACCESS BUS STOPS.
SO IT'S NOT JUST DOWNTOWN BUT I
UNDERSTAND I UNDERSTAND WHERE
YOU'RE COMING FROM.
YEAH, THIS WAS A CONSCIOUS
DECISION MADE LAST YEAR TO ADD
THESE WORDS MEAN IF I WAS
READING THIS I WOULD JUST SEE
THE DOWNTOWN AND I UNDERSTAND
RESIDENTIAL AREAS, RESIDENTIAL
AREAS FOR YOU WOULD THEN MEAN
DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL AREAS AND
NOT THE WHOLE CITY.
ERICA, SOMEBODY WHO WILL BE
TAKING THIS FORWARD I FULLY
UNDERSTAND.
I DEFINITELY I COMPLETELY
UNDERSTAND YOUR POINT AND I
AGREE THAT THOSE OUTLYING AREAS
OUTSIDE OF THE DOWNTOWN
ABSOLUTELY NEED FOCUS AS WELL
AND I DO THINK THERE IS A
BENEFIT IN CALLING OUT DOWNTOWN
BECAUSE THERE IS A MEMO THAT I
NEED TO THINK THAT THE PLACE TO
REVISIT THIS IS WITHIN THE WORK
PLAN.
I WAS GOING TO BRING IT UP NEXT
.
WE'VE BEEN TAKING COMPLAINTS
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF DAYS
AND THE CITY COUNCIL AND BEEN
PUSHING FOR SOME FOLLOW UP ON
THE MEMO THAT COUNCIL REQUESTED
BACK AND AND WE RECEIVED IT
LAST YEAR TWO YEARS AGO.
BUT ESSENTIALLY WE NEED MORE
EVALUATION AND MONITORING
OF THE PROGRESS WE'RE MAKING
BECAUSE WE CAN SEE THAT WE'RE
WE'RE NOT MAKING PROGRESS THAT
WE NEED.
BUT I DO THINK IT IS MORE THAN
ENFORCEMENT.
I THINK WHERE YOU CAN SEE THAT
WE'RE SEEING SOME NEW ISSUES
NOW AROUND OUR NEW
INFRASTRUCTURE AROUND THE IN
THE DOWNTOWN IN PARTICULAR YOU
CAN SEE AROUND THE NEW CYCLE
TRACKS THAT THE SNOW CLEARANCE
THAT'S IS ISN'T HAPPENING
PARTICULARLY WELL IN THOSE
AREAS.
SO I DO THINK WE SHOULD BE
REVISITING THEM AND AND LOOKING
TO SEE WHAT PROGRESS WE'RE
HAVING.
BUT I THINK THE WORK PLAN
SUPPOSED TO DO IT SO WE CAN GET
SOME ONGOING EVALUATION AND
MONITORING AND REPORTING OUT
ABOUT HOW WE'RE GOING TO FIX
THE PROBLEMS THAT WE'RE SEEING
LIKE THIS CHANGE THE HIGH
PEDESTRIAN ACTIVITY AREAS
BECAUSE IT OPENS IT UP OR
EXPANDING SPACES AND THAT CAN
BE DETERMINED.
I'M NOT SURE HOW THAT'S
DETERMINED TO PUT PEDESTRIAN
BUT THANK YOU.
THE OH THE QUESTION
OF ENFORCEMENT DO WE WANT TO
ADD ANYTHING ABOUT ENFORCEMENT
AND WOULD THAT BE UNDERSTOOD TO
INCLUDE THE CITY ON CITY
PROPERTY
INCLUDING BIKE LANES
FOR EXAMPLE, IF WE JUST PUT
ENFORCEMENT DOES THAT KIND
OF WALKABILITY AN ABILITY LIKE
THAT CHANGE OR OR DID YOU WANT
TO PROPOSE AN ALL NEW SEPARABLE
POINT TALKING ABOUT
ENFORCEMENT?
>> I SAY THAT LET'S SAVE THE
ENFORCEMENT CONVERSATION FOR A
TOPIC IN OUR WORK PLAN.
I THINK THAT WE SHOULD ADD
WINTER MAINTENANCE TO OUR WORK
AND IT'S NOT THERE YET WHEN WE
SHOULD WE SHOULD ADD IT AND
TALK ABOUT ENFORCEMENT BUT ALL
RIGHT.
THANKS.
WHAT WE HAVE I THINK JUST A
COUPLE MORE GOOD WAS THAT IT?
ALL RIGHT.
ANY ADDITIONS TO LOCAL POLICY
AGENDA LIST?
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH, RAYMOND, FOR
GOING THROUGH THIS AND AND
MAKING ON THE FLY CHANGES THAT
REALLY HELPS.
SO IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
POLICY AGENDA AS DISCUSSED AND
TO FORWARD TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
>> IS THERE A MOTION TO
SECONDED BY ONE TO ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF THE MOTION?
>> PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
HAND ALL THOSE OPPOSED TO
MOTION PLEASE SAY NO.
RAISE YOUR HAND READ THE MOTION
PASSES AND HOPEFULLY THE THE
WORDSMITH PORTION OF THIS
MEETING IS OVER.
>> ALL RIGHT.
BUT I THINK IT'S YES I WAS
VOTED FOR IT TOO BUT I COULDN'T
GET I'M SORRY BUT I COULDN'T
GET OUT AND I QUICK I THINK I
WILL RECORD THAT THIS.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
WORKPLAN.
SO WE APPROVED THE WORK PLAN
LAST MONTH BUT STEP UPDATED THE
DOCUMENT BASED ON CONVERSATIONS
FROM LAST MONTH AND ARE GOING
TO BE PRESENTED TO US EVERY
MINUTE YOU COULD.
YEAH.
SO I THINK THERE WERE SOME
SUGGESTIONS THAT CAME UP TODAY
KNOW WE DO CONSIDER THIS A
LIVING DOCUMENT EVEN THOUGH WE
ASK FOR YOUR APPROVAL IN
DECEMBER OR JANUARY.
SO YOU DID APPROVE THIS ALREADY
THINGS CHANGE, RIGHT, BECAUSE
THINGS SHIFT AROUND EITHER THEY
GIVE UP IN IMPORTANCE OR MOVED
DOWN IN IMPORTANCE OR NEW
ISSUES EMERGE AND COME INTO
FOCUS AND WE WE TACKLE THOSE.
SO YOU KNOW, I JUST WANTED TO
SHARE THE DOCUMENT WITH YOU
ALL.
WE HAD SOME TIME ON THE AGENDA
SO WE THOUGHT THERE WAS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO JUST KIND OF GO
OVER THE CHANGES THAT WERE MADE
LAST TIME AND THEN ALSO
CONTINUE TO TAKE SUGGESTIONS
AND PLUG IN SOME AGENDA ITEMS
AS WELL.
>> WE ALWAYS DO TRY TO KIND
OF KEEP A BALANCE.
YOU KNOW, I THERE'S A LOT TO
DISCUSS BUT TRYING TO TAKE CARE
OF THE BUSINESS THAT NEEDS TO
BE TAKEN CARE OF IN A SORT
OF TIMELY FASHION AND THOSE
THAT MAYBE ARE A LITTLE BIT
LESS TIME SENSITIVE TO PLUG
THOSE IN A LITTLE LATER WE DID
A GOOD JOB I THINK LAST MONTH
DOING THAT.
>> SO YOU KNOW, JANUARY
OBVIOUSLY THAT'S THIS MEETING
FROM NEXT MEETING.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT HAS
EMERGED THAT I WANT TO DRAW
YOUR ATTENTION TO IS THIS
DISCUSSION ABOUT THE ALL AGES
AND ABILITIES BIKE NETWORK.
I THINK THERE WAS SOME
SUGGESTION THAT AT THE END
OF LAST MEETING TO REVISIT THE
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES BIKE
NETWORK WHAT THOSE FACILITIES
ARE AND HAVE A SPECIFIC
CONVERSATION ABOUT WHAT'S BEING
OWES ON MILLER AVENUE.
PART OF THIS IS IN RESPONSE TO
A POSITION STATEMENT MADE BY
WALK BIKE WASHTENAW AND KIND
OF TALKING THROUGH THE
CONSIDERATIONS THAT ARE GOING
IN ALONG MILLER AND WE THOUGHT
THAT WOULD BE APPROPRIATE TO
HAVE THAT DISCUSSION IN
FEBRUARY.
ONE THING I WILL NOTICE YOU
KNOW, EVERY YEAR WE TALK ABOUT
THE RESURFACING PROGRAM AND IN
THE POLICY AGENDA WE TALKED
ABOUT HOW THINGS ARE GOING TO
BE INCORPORATED WITH TRAFFIC
COMING.
SO THAT WOULD BE AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR YOU TO SEE SOME OF THOSE
THINGS THAT ARE BEING TEED UP
FOR THIS NEXT CONSTRUCTION
CYCLE.
WE SHIFTED DOWN SOME OF THE
TRAFFIC CALMING PETITIONS THAT
ARE CURRENTLY Q JUST BASED ON
WHERE THEY'RE AT BUT EXPECT
BYRD TO COME NEXT MONTH AND
THEN AROUND HENRY TO COME IN
MARCH WE ADDED THE SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTIONS AND PEDESTRIAN
CROSSINGS.
I THINK WE MENTIONED THAT LAST
TIME BASED ON SOME
CONVERSATIONS AND SO ON THE
ANALYSIS THAT I THINK IS DONE.
LET'S SEE A REMINDER, BILL, FOR
THIS YEAR I'M NOT SURE IF
YOU'RE OH, I'M SORRY.
>> I THOUGHT I WAS DOING A
REALLY GOOD JOB OF VERBALIZING
BUT IT MIGHT BE NICE TO SEE IT.
YES.
NO THANK YOU.
SORRY ABOUT THAT THOUGHT I HIT
THE BUTTON BUT I DID NOT.
YES, I JUST WALKED THROUGH
FEBRUARY HERE WE ARE IN MARCH.
THIS WAS ONE OF THE ONES THAT
WE ALSO TALKED ABOUT AND WE
ADDED LAST MONTH WHICH IS THIS
CRASH RESPONSE PROTOCOL.
SO THAT WAS ADDED AGAIN WE
PLUGGED IT IN IN APRIL JUST
BECAUSE THERE SEEMED TO BE SOME
TIME ON THAT AGENDA THEN
ANOTHER THING THAT HAS COME UP
IS SOME OF YOU'VE BEEN
FOLLOWING THE NEWS ABOUT WHAT'S
HAPPENING WITH BIRD AND SPIN
AND SO WILL BE RE CONTEMPLATING
THAT EXISTING CONTRACT AND
TAKING THAT TO COUNCIL BEFORE
THE END OF THE FISCAL YEAR
WHICH OUR FISCAL YEAR ENDS JUNE
30TH.
SO PROBABLY A DISCUSSION IN MAY
WOULD BE APPROPRIATE.
SO THEN THAT WAY THAT CAN BE
TEED UP FOR THAT AND I THINK
THERE ARE GOING TO BE SOME
REGULAR UPDATES.
I KNOW FOR EXAMPLE THAT THERE
WAS SOME DISCUSSION ABOUT
DOWNTOWN CIRCULATION STUDY
UPDATES OR EVEN SAFE STREETS
FOR ALL UPDATES.
SOME OF THOSE ARE MOVING
TARGETS.
WE HOPE TO BRING FOLKS BACK AT
A REGULAR INTERVAL BUT WE JUST
STARTED, FOR EXAMPLE, FOR SAFE
STREETS FOR ALL.
WE STILL ARE WAITING FOR THE
FINAL CONTRACT TO BE APPROVED
BY FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION EVEN THOUGH WE
ARE A YEAR PLUS AFTER THE AWARD
ANNOUNCEMENT.
SO THAT'S JUST HOW THESE THINGS
SOMETIMES SHIFT.
SO THAT'S AN EXAMPLE OF THAT.
WE TALKED ABOUT BUS LANES AND
IMPROVED TRANSIT.
I THINK THAT WAS A SUGGESTION
THAT CAME OUT OF THE LAST
MEETING.
>> LINEAR PARKS WAS ANOTHER
SUGGESTION THAT CAME OUT
OF LAST MEETING AND SO I THINK
THAT COVERS SOME OF THE NEW
THINGS THAT WERE ADDED SINCE
LAST TIME.
BUT AGAIN THERE ARE SOME
DISCUSSIONS THAT CAME UP TODAY.
I THINK I'M HEARING WINTER
MAINTENANCE FOR OUR SIDEWALKS
AND OR BIKE LANES.
MY ONE CAUTIONARY TALE TO YOU
IS FEBRUARY LOOKS LIKE IT WILL
PROBABLY BE A FAIRLY FULL
AGENDA, ESPECIALLY IF YOU WANT
A VERY HEAVY CONVERSATION ABOUT
WINTER MAINTENANCE.
I KNOW THE TIMING SEEMS
PERTINENT TO HAVE NOW AND WE
CAN ALWAYS DEFER SOMETHING
THAT'S RESURFACING PRESENTATION
TO ANOTHER MONTH IF YOU WOULD
PREFER.
BUT WE THINK THE TRUNK LINE
TRANSFER FEELS TIMELY AND WE
SHOULD PROBABLY HAVE THAT
DISCUSSION NEXT MONTH AS WELL
AS THE ALL AGES ABILITIES BIKE
NETWORK HAVE THAT CONVERSATION
NEXT MONTH AS WELL BECAUSE
OF HOW WE'RE TRYING TO MOVE
THAT WORK ALONG.
>> SO IF THERE'S SUGGESTIONS ON
WHERE TO PLUG IN WINTER
MAINTENANCE, HAPPY TO DO THAT
OR YOU JUST WANT US TO FIND A
WAY TO PLUG THAT IN.
HAPPY TO DO THAT.
AND IF THERE ARE ANY OTHER
SUGGESTIONS, YOU CAN TAKE NOTES
ON THAT FIGURE OUT WAYS
OF INCORPORATING THOSE THAT
WILL ADD THAT TO OUR AGENDA
TOPICS LIST FOR SURE.
AND THEN GET TO THEM WHERE
APPROPRIATE.
>> ERIKA?
>> YEAH, I CERTAINLY DEFERRED
IT TO STAFF WHEN YOU THINK THIS
WOULD BE BEST IN TERMS OF A
PRESENTATION MY MY DESIRE IS TO
MAKE SURE THAT I HAD SENT A
MESSAGE THAT IT COPIED THE
TRANSPORTATION STAFF ON THIS.
BUT MR. EARLIER A COUPLE
OF DAYS AGO REGARDING THE MEMO
THAT WE HAD RECEIVED ON
SIDEWALK CLEARANCE AND THE SORT
OF IMPROVEMENTS THAT THE CITY
HAD WAS AIMING TO MAKE BASED ON
COUNCIL DESIRE AND A LOT
OF THAT INVOLVE MONITORING WE
CAN SEE IN AFTER THIS FIRST
HEAVY STORM OF THE SEASON WHICH
IS PARTICULARLY HARD IN TERMS
OF THE YOU KNOW, THE HEAVY SNOW
WET AND THEN THE THE IMMEDIATE
FREEZE.
BUT WE SEE SOME PROBLEMS.
I'M CERTAINLY GETTING REPORTS
OF IT AND I THINK WE CAN SEE IT
PARTICULARLY IN THE DOWNTOWN
BUT ALL ACROSS THE COMMUNITY
AND SO I GUESS I WANT TO SEE
THAT WE'RE MONITORING THIS AND
THAT WE'RE EVALUATING HOW WE'RE
GOING TO IMPROVE BOTH OUR OWN
CITY OPERATIONS BUT ALSO WHAT'S
THE CONNECTIVITY AND ACCESS
ACROSS THE DOWNTOWN ON?
ONE OF THE REASONS WE HAD
FOCUSED IN ON THE DOWNTOWN IS
BECAUSE WE ACTUALLY HAVE SUCH A
COMPREHENSIVE NETWORK OF KIND
OF THE MAIN STREET AREAS AREAS
IS DOING CLEARANCE AND SO IT'S
EASIER TO MAKE PROGRESS AND TO
MONITOR OUR PROGRESS IN THAT
AREA.
SO AND BEING SUPER LONG WINDED
ANYWAY I DON'T KNOW WHERE IT
NEEDS TO FIT IN IF IT NEEDS TO
ACTUALLY HAPPEN IN FEBRUARY BUT
THE WORK NEEDS TO HAPPEN OVER
THE NEXT COUPLE OF MONTHS TO
PROVIDE THAT PRESENTATION TO
MAKE PROGRESS
.
ANYTHING ELSE AS ALWAYS
OF COURSE PLEASE CONTACT ANY
OF US WITH IDEAS FOR AGENDA
TOPICS AS THEY COME UP IN THE
NEW ALWAYS WORK TO INCLUDE
THOSE.
THIS IS THE PLAN AS IT IS NOW
AND LIKE BRANDON SAID, THINGS
WILL MOVE.
THINGS WILL CERTAINLY BE ADDED
BUT
THIS IS THIS IS WHAT WE'VE
GOT AT A MINIMUM FOR THIS YEAR.
>> ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP STOP IMPORTANT UPDATES.
YOU RECEIVED A SNAP REPORT
PROVIDING PROJECT UPDATES WITH
YOUR AGENDA MATERIALS LIKE
EVERY MONTH RAYMOND.
NOW IF YOU WOULDN'T MIND
REVIEWING THAT REPORT.
ALL RIGHT.
JANUARY IS ALWAYS A FUN ONE TO
REPORT ON BECAUSE PRETTY MUCH
EVERYTHING IS NEW.
SO I GET TO KIND OF HIGHLIGHT
ALL OF THEM BUT YOU'LL NOTICE
SOME OF THEM WILL KIND
OF STAGNATE FOR THE NEXT COUPLE
OF MONTHS BECAUSE REALLY
CONSTRUCTION SEASON WON'T RAMP
UP.
SO THERE MIGHT BE SOME MOVEMENT
ON DESIGN AND THINGS LIKE THAT
BUT YOU'RE PROBABLY GOING TO
THE JANUARY REPORT TENDS TO BE
A LITTLE BIT BIGGER.
FEBRUARY TENDS TO BE A PRETTY
SHORT REPORT SO JUST WANT TO
TEMPER EXPECTATIONS ABOUT WHAT
THESE UPDATES WILL LOOK LIKE IN
THE NEXT COUPLE OF MONTHS OR
SO.
>> THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
RESURFACING PROJECTS JUST
WANTED TO KIND OF TALK ABOUT
SOME OF THE PROJECTS THAT ARE
CARRYING OVER SO ABERDEEN AND
HAWTHORNE, NORFOLK AND SUFFOLK
ARE SOME OF THE PROJECTS THAT
ARE COMING WILL BE COMPLETED IN
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR THAT WERE
ORIGINALLY IDENTIFIED AS TWENTY
TWENTY THREE PROJECTS BUT IT'S
ALWAYS JUST A FUNCTION
OF WEATHER AND FUNDING AND
CONTRACTOR AVAILABILITY IN
TERMS OF WHAT GETS DONE AND
WHAT DOESN TEEING UP THE TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR RESURFACING PROJECT
THERE IS A PROJECT WEBSITE FOR
THAT AS WELL.
THE AREA IS KIND OF A FOCUS ON
THE LAKEWOOD NEIGHBORHOOD AND
THEN KIND OF THE IT GETS
BIRDWOOD SO YOU KNOW SOUTH
OF JACKSON, EAST OF STADIUM
NORTH LIBERTY KIND OF THAT AREA
AND THEN THERE IS SOME TALK
OF REDOING AN ASPHALT PATH ON
THE NORTH SIDE OF GLACIER WAY
NEAR THAT INTERSECTION.
AGAIN YOU'RE GOING TO GET A
PRESENTATION ON US NEXT MONTH
FROM NICK HUTCHINSON.
SO HE'LL GO INTO A LOT MORE
DETAIL KIND OF SHOW YOU THE
GEOGRAPHY AREAS OF INTEREST AND
THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF WORK
THAT WILL BE DONE SIDEWALK
GAPS, THE NEW PROJECTS THAT ARE
BEING IDENTIFIED ARE GLENDALE
CIRCLE FAIR STREET STONE SCHOOL
ROAD SONNY WOOD INGREY LAKE
INTERSECTION AND THEN THERE ARE
SOME KIND OF CARRYOVERS
ELLSWORTH WAS ONE OF THE ONES
THAT WAS SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE
BUT THERE WAS ONE GAP THAT
REMAINED DUE TO UTILITY
CONFLICT AND THEN THERE'S
ANOTHER PROJECT ON BURWOOD
AVENUE A SINGLE LOT ST. HILL
AND ST. AND HILL IMPROVEMENTS.
SO FOR THOSE OF YOU THAT HAVE
FOLLOWED THIS PROJECT STATE IS
LARGELY DONE.
BUT HILL WASN'T ABLE TO BE DONE
THIS YEAR SO THAT WILL BE THE
FOCUS FOR SPRING OF TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR.
SO IT'LL BE NICE TO HAVE THAT
PROJECT COMPLETED.
>> EAST MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE
COUNCIL DID APPROVE THE
RESOLUTION FOR THE PROJECT ON
DECEMBER 18TH AND CONSTRUCTION
IS EXPECTED TO BEGIN IN MARCH
AT THE AT THE TIME OF THE
WRITING OF THIS I DON'T THINK
YOU HAVE YET PASSED IT HAS
SINCE UM LET'S SEE MILLER
AVENUE WE TALKED ABOUT COMING
TO YOU NEXT MONTH WITH A MORE
EXHAUSTIVE DISCUSSION ABOUT
THIS.
SO STAY TUNED.
WE MENTIONED HERE IN THE PAST
THAT THERE WAS KIND OF A
CAPITAL PROJECT THAT AFFORDS US
THE OPPORTUNITY TO EXPAND THE
BIKE FACILITY THAT THE BUILT
FURTHER TO THE WEST.
SO THERE'S STILL SOME DESIRE TO
MAKE A BICYCLE INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS ALONG THAT
CORRIDOR AND WE'LL COME TO YOU
WITH OUR LATEST THINKING AT THE
NEXT MEETING 75TH STREET
ENGRAIN VIEW.
I THINK SOME OF YOU FOLLOW THIS
PROJECT WE'VE BEEN TO SEVERAL
TIMES ON IT AND WE MADE SOME
SUBSTANTIVE CHANGES ESPECIALLY
THE 7TH STREET AND THOSE WERE
KIND OF CARRIED FORWARD ON
GREENVIEW AS WELL INCLUDE
STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS ROAD
NERANG RAIN GARDENS, SAND
FILTERS UNDERGROUND STORMWATER
STORAGE WATER MAIN REPLACEMENT
RESURFACING PUMP OUT CROSSWALKS
AND THERE'S A PROJECT PAGE THAT
GIVES YOU A LOT MORE DETAIL ON
THAT ON THAT PROJECT IS
SCHEDULED FOR THIS COMING YEAR
PROJECTS CURRENTLY IN PLANNING
AND DESIGN THE SOUTH MAIN
STREET SIDEWALK.
SO THIS IS A LONG AND GOLF
OUTING THE OPPOSITE SIDE
OF PIONEER HIGH SCHOOL.
THAT PROJECT IS BEING PLANNED.
IT'S BEING DESIGNED AND
HOPEFULLY CONSTRUCTION WILL
HAPPEN IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
IT'S ALSO TRYING TO BE
COORDINATED WITH THE ARBOR ON
MAIN DEVELOPMENT WHICH IS AT
THE CORNER OF MAIN AND MAIN AND
OBVIOUSLY RIGHT ACROSS FROM THE
BUSHES WAS FORMERLY KNOWN AS
VALHALLA.
SO TRYING TO COORDINATE A LOT
OF THAT WOULD BE A NICE
ADDITION TO THE SIDEWALK
NETWORK ON PRETTY HIGH PROFILE
SECTION OF MAIN STREET THAT
CURRENTLY LACKS SIDEWALKS.
>> A STATE STREET NORTH
UNIVERSITY.
THIS IS KIND OF THE NEXT PHASE
OF STATE STREET AND THE CITY'S
DOING IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
DDA SEVERAL DIFFERENT CHUNKS.
SO THIS IS WILLIAM RSU AND
ONAKA UNIVERSITY FROM ST.
FLETCHER.
THERE'S WATER MAIN REPLACEMENT
STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS, STREET
RESURFACING SANITARY SEWER WORK
BIKE LANES, INTERSECTION
IMPROVEMENTS AND EVALUATION
OF CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
DESIGN IS UNDERWAY.
THERE'S ALSO A LOT
OF DISCUSSION RIGHT NOW AS WELL
ABOUT TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS.
SO THERE DISCUSSIONS GOING ON
WITH THE RIDE AS WELL AS THE
UNIVERSITY ABOUT WAYS THAT
THAT'S A VERY HEAVILY USE
TRANSIT CORRIDOR BY NOT JUST
THE RIDE BUT ALSO THE BLUE
BUSSES OF THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN.
SO TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WAYS
THAT WE CAN HELP IMPROVE THEIR
OPERATIONS ON STATE NIXON ROAD
RECONSTRUCTION RECONSTRUCTION
FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO FOLLOWED
THIS FOR A WHILE NOW WHEN I
FIRST CAME TO THE CITY BACK IN
TWENTY EIGHTEEN TWENTY NINETEEN
IS WHEN THERE WAS A LOT
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND DESIGN
CONCEPTS ABOUT ROUNDABOUTS.
SO WE'RE COMING UP ON ACTUALLY
HAVING THE FUNDING TO START
IMPLEMENTING THOSE PROJECTS.
SO CONSTRUCTION IS PLANNED FOR
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE SO THAT'LL
START BLOWING THE DUST OFF
THOSE THOSE PLANS UPDATING THEM
AND START GETTING INTO THE
FINAL DESIGN FOR WATER MAIN
SANITARY STORMWATER ROUNDABOUTS
BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN PAULENE
WATER MAIN.
THIS IS FROM 7TH STREET TO MAIN
STREET SO AGAIN BACK IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN I THINK IT WAS PAULENE
IS DONE WEST OF SEVENTH SO THIS
IS THE SECTION BETWEEN SEVEN
MAIN AGAIN SOME OF THAT IS
DRIVING THE WORK OUR WATER MAIN
REPLACEMENT'S BUT BECAUSE THIS
IS ALSO ON OUR ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES BIKE NETWORK WE'D BE
LOOKING AT A POSSIBLE ROAD
RECONFIGURATION TO ACCOMMODATE
THAT ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
BIKE FACILITY WE DON'T KNOW
WHAT THAT IS YET BUT WE KNOW
THAT THE PLAN CALLS FOR SOME
SORT OF UPGRADE ALONG THAT
CORRIDOR.
SO WE ONCE DESIGN STARTS WE'LL
START THINKING ABOUT WHAT THOSE
OPTIONS ARE.
>> PITTSVILLE VILLAGE
IMPROVEMENTS THIS IS A LARGE
AREA BOUNDED BY PITTSFIELD
BOULEVARD, WHITEWOOD AND
PINECREST AGAIN WATER MAIN IS
THE DRIVING FORCE WITH SOME OUR
DRIVING WORK BEHIND IT
STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS,
SANITARY SEWER IMPROVEMENTS AND
SOME ROAD RESURFACING.
WE MAY LOOK AT SOME OTHER
OPPORTUNITIES FOR NON MOTORIZED
ENHANCEMENTS AS WELL.
THE DOWNTOWN CIRCULATION STUDY
YOU ALL GOT A FAIRLY GOOD
UPDATE ON THAT JUST RECENTLY.
SO WE ARE LOOKING TO TAKE SOME
OF THOSE CONCEPTS THAT YOU
FIRST CRACK AT AND START
GETTING THOSE PUBLICLY HERE IN
THE SPRING OF TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR.
AND AGAIN THE IDEA IS TO REALLY
TRY TO BRING YOU KNOW, TO
SYNCHRONIZE ALL OF THESE
DIFFERENT EFFORTS BETWEEN THE
DAY'S PLANS, THE RIDES PLANS,
THE CITY'S PLANS ABOUT WHAT'S
HOW WE CAN REALLY IMPROVE
MOBILITY DOWNTOWN THE STATE
TRUNK LINE JURISDICTION
TRANSFER ANALYSIS THIS WE ARE
HOPING TO BRING THIS TO YOU
NEXT MONTH.
WE ARE FINALIZING OUR REPORT
RIGHT NOW WITH OUR CONSULTANT
SAM SCHWARTZ AND WE WANT TO
KIND OF BRING THOSE FINDINGS TO
YOU AS AND THEN ALSO FIGURE OUT
A WAY TO GET THOSE IN FRONT
OF COUNCIL AS WELL.
SO STAY TUNED FOR MORE ON THAT
IN I ALLUDED TO THIS EARLIER
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT THE WORKPLAN
BUT SPIN'S PARENT COMPANY BIRD
IS GOING THROUGH FINANCIAL
RESTRUCTURING.
WE'VE BEEN IN SEVERAL
CONVERSATIONS WITH SPIN SINCE
THAT ANNOUNCEMENT.
THEY HAVE INDICATED TO US THAT
THEY DO NOT ANTICIPATE ANY
CHANGES TO THEIR OPERATION THAT
WE ARE ONE OF THEIR STRONGER
MARKETS AND THEREFORE THEY
EXPECT TO BE ABLE TO CONTINUE
TO PROVIDE THE SERVICE THAT
THEY ARE PROVIDING NOW AND INTO
THE FUTURE.
WE'RE MONITORING THE SPACE
CLOSELY BECAUSE AS YOU CAN
IMAGINE, FINANCIAL
RESTRUCTURING AND BANKRUPTCY
ARE THINGS OUGHT TO BE TAKEN
LIGHTLY.
SO IT IS SOMETHING WE WE
DEFINITELY WANT TO KIND OF GET
MINUTE BY MINUTE UPDATES ON AND
WE'VE BEEN IN CLOSE CONTACT
WITH OUR COLLEAGUES.
IT'S BEEN TO GET THE LATEST
INFORMATION ON THAT.
LIKE I SAID, WE DO HOPE TO
BRING THIS BACK TO THE
COMMISSION AND MAY PROBABLY TO
TALK ABOUT THE RENEWAL OF THE
CONTRACT WITH THE MICROLEVEL
ABILITY PROVIDER
ALL RIGHT, NOT
COORDINATION.
I JUST WANTED TO FLAG THE US
TWENTY THREE IMPROVEMENT
PROJECTS WHICH THIS COMMISSION
PASSED A RESOLUTION ON THE LAST
QUARTER OF LAST YEAR I CAME
HERE WHAT IT WAS MAYBE NOVEMBER
WAS GIVING SIGNALS TO EM NOT TO
PAY SPECIAL ATTENTION TO THE
NON MOTORIZED CROSSINGS ACROSS
THE US.
TWENTY THREE AND ALSO
DISCOURAGE ANYTHING THAT WOULD
INCREASE VEHICULAR CAPACITY AND
I'M PARAPHRASING SO PLEASE
AFFORD ME THAT LUXURY IS SO I
DID JUST WANT TO LET YOU KNOW I
WAS ON A STAKEHOLDER MEETING
LAST WEEK THERE WAS TALK
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
OPPORTUNITY ON FEBRUARY 1ST AND
THERE ARE STILL FOUR DESIGN
ALTERNATIVES THAT ARE BEING
CONSIDERED, TWO OF WHICH DO ADD
GENERAL PURPOSE VEHICULAR
CAPACITY ADDING A GENERAL
PURPOSE AND ADDING A FLEX LANE
AND THE FOURTH OPTION IS MAYBE
MORE NUANCED WHICH IS A HIGH
OCCUPANCY VEHICLE LANE IS ALSO
UP FOR CONSIDERATION
.
STREETLIGHT FIXES TO E THIS
SHOULD REFLECT I THINK THE
FINAL NUMBER FOR TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AND WE'LL START UPDATING
NEW NUMBERS FOR TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAMS
SUBMITTALS BIRD DID CLOSE AND
IT APPEARS THERE IS SUPPORT FOR
THE PROJECT.
YOU HEARD ME SAY WE'RE BRINGING
THAT BACK TO YOU ARIELLA AND
HENRY FINAL POLLING JUST CLOSE
THIS WEEK.
I DON'T THINK WE'VE HAD A
CHANCE TO TALLY THOSE RESULTS
BUT IF THEY PASS THEY WILL BE
BROUGHT FORWARD TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AT A
FUTURE MEETING.
AND JUST AS A REMINDER FOR
THOSE OF YOU WHO ARE MAYBE NEW
TO THIS SPACE, EVEN THOUGH
THERE ARE CHANGES TO THE
TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAM WHICH
WOULD NO LONGER REQUIRE KIND
OF THIS FINAL POLLING AND FINAL
APPROVAL PROCESS STEPS, WE
PRETTY MUCH SAID THAT ANYTHING
THAT WAS ALREADY INTO THIS KIND
OF GRANDFATHERED UNDER THE OLD
EXISTING PROGRAM, WHICH IS WHY
WE'RE STILL TRYING TO KEEP
PEOPLE WHO ARE IN THE PROGRAM
GIVE THEM THE SAME LEVEL
OF EXPECTATION ABOUT WHAT THAT
LOOKS LIKE.
SO THE QUEUE WAS LONG SO YOU'RE
GOING TO CONTINUE TO SEE THESE
FOR A LITTLE WHILE YET
CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM GRANTS
.
THE BIG THING TO NOTE HERE IS
WE JUST CLOSED THE SURVEY ON A
PREFERENCE SURVEY ABOUT COLOR
TEMPERATURE AND WATTAGE OR THE
STREET LIGHT UPGRADE.
SO AGAIN, THE IDEA IS TO TAKE
ALL THE HIGH PRESSURE SODIUM
THAT D.T. OWNS AND OPERATES AND
UPGRADE THOSE TO LIGHT EMITTING
DIODE OR LED LIGHTS.
SO WE PUT OUT ON THE STREET
SEVERAL DIFFERENT PILOTS THAT
WERE OF DIFFERENT WATTAGES AND
DIFFERENT COLOR TEMPERATURES.
THE IDEA IS TO TRY TO BE
SENSITIVE TO AND SOMEWHAT
CONSISTENT WITH THE DARK SKIES
ORDINANCE.
SO THOSE RESULTS JUST CLOSE.
WE'RE STILL KIND OF LOOKING
THOSE OVER BEFORE WE MAKE A
RECOMMENDATION ON HOW TO
PROCEED.
>> AND THEN LASTLY THE LAUNCH
OF LANDSEER IS CONTINUES AGAIN.
THIS IS SOMETHING WE'VE BEEN
TRYING TO DO TO REALLY JUST
MAKE THIS STANDARD PRACTICE
AMONG MULTIPLE CITY DEPARTMENTS
TO INCORPORATE VISION ZERO AND
SAFE SYSTEMS INTO ALL THE WORK
THAT'S BEING DONE NOT JUST
CAPITAL PROJECTS BUT YOU KNOW,
ALL ACTIVITIES PLANNING
ENFORCEMENT, SO FORTH AND SO
ON.
AND SO THESE ARE HELD FOR CITY
STAFF TO COME ATTEND.
THEY'VE BEEN PRETTY WELL
ATTENDED AND TYPICALLY WHAT WE
DO IS WE TRY TO DO A DEEP DOVE
ON A SPECIFIC TOPIC LIKE FOR
EXAMPLE, THE NEXT COUPLE ARE
FOCUSED ON MAINTENANCE TRAFFIC
IN PARTICULAR HOW WE
ACCOMMODATE BICYCLES AND
PEDESTRIANS WHEN SIDEWALKS ARE
BEING CLOSED OR BIKE LANES ARE
BEING CLOSED AS A RESULT
OF ADJACENT CONSTRUCTION AND
TRYING TO GET PEOPLE TO THINK
ABOUT MORE CREATIVE SOLUTIONS
ABOUT HOW WE CAN ENSURE THAT
THOSE SYSTEMS REMAIN USABLE FOR
EVERYONE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
AND WITH THAT, THAT CONCLUDES
THE HIGHLIGHTS I WANTED TO MAKE
.
>> I'M HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN ANY
QUESTIONS THAT YOU ONLY HAVE.
THANK YOU, RAYMOND.
ANY QUESTIONS?
FEEL FREE TO EMAIL NEXT DAY AS
REPORTS ARE THERE ANY
COMMISSIONERS OF ROSILY IS ON
TO ANOTHER BODY OR ORGANIZATION
THAT HAVE A BRIEF REPORT OR
UPDATE TO PROVIDE?
THAT WAS THE TIME
FOR IT.
THERE AREN'T ANY THAN
COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS.
ARE THERE ANY COMMISSIONERS
THAT WOULD LIKE TO PROVIDE ANY
REPORTS OR UPDATES
LIST
OF PEDESTRIAN BICYCLE CRASHES
WAS ATTACHED BY HOPEFULLY
PEOPLE HAD A CHANCE TO DO THAT
AGAIN FOR THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER
AND THIS CASE >> AS HAS
HAPPENED A FEW OTHER TIMES THIS
YEAR, THERE WAS A CRASH, A
SEVERE A OR A SEVERITY WE CALL
IT CRASH THAT WAS MISSING FROM
THAT LIST HAPPENED ON NOVEMBER
TWENTY SEVENTH.
IT'S NOT REFLECTED IN THE
ADMINISTRATOR'S REPORT AND IT'S
NOT REFLECTED IN THAT SAME
REPORT THAT WAS ATTACHED TO OUR
AGENDA.
SO WE'D JUST LIKE TO POINT OUT
THAT WE APPEAR TO HAVE SOME
BREAKDOWN IN OUR PROCESS FOR
COLLECTING AND REPORTING AND
WHAT IT RESULTS IN IS APPARENT
UNDER THE COUNTING OF THE
NUMBER OF SEVERE CRASHES THAT
WE HAVE.
SO THAT WOULD I WOULD LIKE TO
GET THAT FIXED AND I DON'T KNOW
WHERE THAT BREAKDOWN IS BUT I'M
GOING TO POINT IT OUT AGAIN
THIS HAPPENED IN JANUARY
OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE THERE
WAS A CRASH AT MT. KINGSLEE
THAT WASN'T COUNTED AND WAS
ALSO A FATALITY OF A SCOOTER
RIDER ON HILL STREET THAT WAS
NOT INCLUDED IN THE CITY STATUS
REPORT.
SO PLEASE CAN WE FIGURE OUT
WHERE THAT IS GOING WRONG AND
GET IT FIXED?
THANK YOU OR THANK YOU.
I KNOW THAT IN THE NEAR FUTURE
WE HAVE A CRASH RESPONSE
PROTOCOL, A TOPIC THAT WILL BE
COMING WOULD BE A GOOD TOPIC TO
DISCUSS THE RIGHT CALL FOR
AGENDA ITEMS.
WE'VE KIND OF ALREADY GONE
THROUGH WHAT'S COMING IN THE
NEAR FUTURE HERE IF YOU HAVE
ANY AGENDA ITEM REQUESTS OR
IDEAS PLEASE AS ALWAYS EMAIL
THEM OR LET US KNOW ANYWAY YOU
PREFER AT THE NEXT MEETING WILL
BE WEDNESDAY FEBRUARY TWENTY
FIRST AT SEVEN PM.
THIS WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL
MEETING AND SO THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS.
WE WILL ADJOURNED OUR JANUARY
SEVENTEENTH YES OR NO JUST
REALLY QUICKLY I WANT TO SAY
WELCOME BACK HERE AND THANK YOU
TO DORMONT SO WELCOME BACK.
>> GOOD TO SEE YOU.
THANK YOU.
ABSOLUTELY.
>> SENTIMENT IS CUPPY I'M SURE
BY EVERYONE.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
NO OBJECTIONS.
WE WILL ADJOURN JANUARY 17
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR MEETING I
THINK EVERYBODY IS GOING TO
THINK ABOUT